Build a blue team for efficient cyber threat management in your organization

Key Features
Explore blue team operations and understand how to detect, prevent, and respond to threats
Dive deep into the intricacies of risk assessment and threat management
Learn about governance, compliance, regulations, and other best practices for blue team implementation
Book Description
We've reached a point where all organizational data is connected through some network. With advancements and connectivity comes ever-evolving cyber threats - compromising sensitive data and access to vulnerable systems. Cybersecurity Blue Team Strategies is a comprehensive guide that will help you extend your cybersecurity knowledge and teach you to implement blue teams in your organization from scratch.

Through the course of this book, you'll learn defensive cybersecurity measures while thinking from an attacker's perspective. With this book, you'll be able to test and assess the effectiveness of your organization's cybersecurity posture. No matter the medium your organization has chosen- cloud, on-premises, or hybrid, this book will provide an in-depth understanding of how cyber attackers can penetrate your systems and gain access to sensitive information. Beginning with a brief overview of the importance of a blue team, you'll learn important techniques and best practices a cybersecurity operator or a blue team practitioner should be aware of. By understanding tools, processes, and operations, you'll be equipped with evolving solutions and strategies to overcome cybersecurity challenges and successfully manage cyber threats to avoid adversaries.

By the end of this book, you'll have enough exposure to blue team operations and be able to successfully set up a blue team in your organization.

What you will learn
Understand blue team operations and its role in safeguarding businesses
Explore everyday blue team functions and tools used by them
Become acquainted with risk assessment and management from a blue team perspective
Discover the making of effective defense strategies and their operations
Find out what makes a good governance program
Become familiar with preventive and detective controls for minimizing risk
Who this book is for
This book is for cybersecurity professionals involved in defending an organization's systems and assets against attacks. Penetration testers, cybersecurity analysts, security leaders, security strategists, and blue team members will find this book helpful. Chief Information Security Officers (CISOs) looking at securing their organizations from adversaries will also benefit from this book. To get the most out of this book, basic knowledge of IT security is recommended.

Table of Contents
Establishing a Defense Program
Managing a Defense Security Team
Risk Assessment
Blue Team Operations
Threats
Governance, Compliance, Regulations and Best Practices
Preventive Controls
Detective Controls
Cyber Threat Intelligence
Incident Response and Recovery
Prioritizing and Implementing a Blue Team Strategy
Expert Insights

--------------------PART 1 ESTABLISHING THE BLUE

p.22 As cyberattacks ramp up across all countries and industries, it is an absolute necessity for every 
organization to have a defense capability. However, the journey of setting up such expertise and attaining 
the right level of maturity requires the right combination of technology, processes, and people. This 
roadmap may appear daunting and overwhelming to many who are just getting started. This book aims 
to help guide and aid organizations and professionals on that journey. It aims to ensure all aspects of 
a blue team defense program are understood and that there are no blind spots.
Cybersecurity professionals who are grouped under the banner of blue team identify various security 
holes, also known as vulnerabilities, in the organization’s infrastructure and applications. These efforts 
help in patching and implementing various security procedures and controls. Cyber professionals 
working as blue teamers usually have a knack for creatively thinking and rapidly responding to various 
kinds of security events and incidents. They are in charge of protecting business entities against cyber 
risks and threats.

p.23 All the user activities are recorded, and suspicious activities trigger alerts as 
per the rules configured in the various security tools. Daily checks such as auditing DNS and firewall 
configuration, performing daily compliance checks across the dashboards of different tools deployed, 
and others are some of the Key Responsibility Areas (KRAs) of blue teamers.

Blue teamers are also tasked with establishing various kinds of technical security controls over critical 
assets. Hence, they have to identify and classify the most critical network components in the organization. 
Organizations can utilize a Configuration Management Database (CMDB) to document the change 
in any configuration they make to those assets. Also, CMDBs are used to centralize a record of all the 
network components in any network infrastructure. Assets that are likely to shut down the business 
altogether if they are hit by cyberattacks are categorized as critical assets. Most of these assets are 
hardened with additional security controls. Along with risk assessment, blue teamers perform impact 
assessment studies as well. This involves calculating the impact that various cyberattacks could have 
if they hit certain critical assets and if those assets go down for a specific time.

composition: analysts (soc, L1 L2 L3), incident responder, threat hunter, security consultant, security admin, iam admin, compliance analyst

p.27 RED TEAM A red team’s mission consists of searching for known vulnerabilities that have already been disclosed 
and have a Common Vulnerabilities and Exposures (CVE) ID

The detailed responsibilities of a red team are beyond the scope of this chapter. However, it is important 
to note that typically, the red team and the blue team work in tandem. Some of the areas where they 
work together are as follows:
• Creating a network topology/hierarchy map of the business’s network infrastructure so that 
they can analyze the number of hosts running, as well as their statuses
• Assessing the services running and the open ports on those systems
• Identifying the vendor, firmware, and OS details among other relevant equipment parameters
• Identifying and exploiting the CVEs in servers, hubs, firewalls, routers, L2/L3 switches, Wi-Fi 
access points, and other network equipment
• Hacking various kinds of physical security controls, such as glass doors, digital locks, CCTV 
networks, and sometimes the security personnel as well

p.28 The fundamental goal of the red and blue team exercises is to improve the organization’s overall 
security posture. This is where the purple team notion comes into play. A purple team isn’t always 
a standalone group, though it may be. A purple team’s purpose is to bring together the red and blue 
teams while encouraging them to collaborate and exchange ideas to build a strong feedback loop. 
The purpose of a purple team is to develop blue team capabilities while maximizing the results of red 
team engagements. A company functions best when the red and blue teams collaborate to strengthen 
the organization’s security posture.

p.30 Blue teams, similar 
to red and purple teams, utilize a variety of security technologies, including honeypots, sandboxes, 
XDRs and NGAVs, threat detection frameworks, and SIEM solutions. The following is a list of some 
of the most popular cybersecurity tools that are often used by these teams for their operational work:
• Splunk
• Haktrails
• Cuckoo Sandbox
• SecurityTrails API

p.34 Every organization should look at the right metrics that apply to them. This helps them not only 
objectively define the level of security they currently have but also ensure they are progressing and 
improving with each passing day.

p.34 Key Performance Indicators (KPIs), Key Risk Indicators (KRIs), and security postures give us a 
glimpse into how the blue team is doing over time. This assists the managers and the leadership in 
understanding what works and what does not, as well as making smarter decisions about future initiatives.
Metrics provide measurable and verifiable data that is frequently used to show management and board 
members that managers are working diligently to secure sensitive data and IT assets. Many Chief 
Information Security Officers (CISOs) and Chief Information Officers (CIOs) are discovering 
that reporting and giving context on cybersecurity metrics is a key aspect of their jobs, owing to 
the growing requirements from the shareholders, regulators, and board. Many board members in 
industries, such as finance, have a fiduciary or statutory obligation to manage cybersecurity risk and 
also protect PII data. Some new laws and regulations have helped fuel this trend. Some notable laws/
regulations are General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR), California Consumer Privacy Act
(CCPA), and Lei Geral de Proteção de Dados Pessoais (LGPD), also referred to as the General Data 
Protection Law from Brazil, and many such others around the globe. In the next section, we will look 
at some of the main indicators that can be monitored by the blue teams to ensure compliance and 
security for their organizations. 

p.36 Blue teams across industries usually follow a few phases to embark on the journey to understand which 
metrics work for them the best and how they would go about ensuring their organizations can get the 
most value out of them. It is important to note that these phases are iterative and must be revisited 
periodically. Over time, an organization’s tech footprint or business needs may change, and the threat 
landscape will constantly evolve, leading to the KRI metrics having to be changed.
There are five main phases in this journey.
Phase 1 – discovery
Phase 2 – nominating the relevant assets and KRIs
Phase 3 – baselining and limits
Phase 4 – monitoring, investigating, and reporting
Phase 5 – risk management

Selecting essential cybersecurity metrics:

Inventory and Control of Enterprise Assets
Inventory and Control of Software Assets
Data Protection
Secure Configuration of Enterprise Assets and Software
Account Management
Access Control Management
Continuous Vulnerability Management
Audit Log Management
Email and Web Browser Protections
Malware Defenses
Data Recovery
Network Infrastructure Management
Network Monitoring and Defense
Security Awareness and Skills Training
Service Provider Management
Application Software Security
Incident Response Management
Penetration Testing

p.41 What pitfalls to avoid when automating the workflows of the blue 
team
When automating the workflow of the entire blue team, you will face many hurdles, right from the 
initial phases of implementing the automation, such as a technical solution. The following pitfalls are 
encountered by many organizations and you are advised to watch out for to avoid them as early as 
possible while maturing your security program:
• Lack of standards and best practices: For better or for worse, standard tool operating 
methodologies look at exploring various features and capabilities that are used successfully 
by other organizations. Unfortunately, there are no standards across any sector and especially 
cross-sector that can be lifted and used as-is by a blue team.
• Management orientation: Senior management understands and expects a control that can 
explain the business benefits in clear dollar value. The notion of security metrics is still relatively 
new in the business. Many senior executives are unsure of its worth, let alone its design, and 
are unwilling to devote resources to its development.
• The rate of change: Technology evolves quickly, and risks that are incorporated or inherent in 
a specific technology today may rise or diminish when new versions or advances are released. 
Workflows related to a specific technology or even a technology-centric process should be 
re-evaluated regularly whenever the underlying technology undergoes a substantial upgrade.
• Measures to maintain control: Internal control measures must be established before effective 
indicators can be devised and executed. An organization that is unsure about its control measures 
will not be able to develop meaningful indicators around it. Fortunately, many organizations 
have gone through lengthy exercises to record essential control mechanisms as part of their 
compliance procedures. These controls are frequently used to determine active risk indicators 
on various security automation tools and can be used to develop measurable indicators.
• Business risk management: People in charge of establishing and managing the technology 
are primarily concerned with the technology itself, rather than the business risk posed by 
its failure. Moreover, the degree of impact a security incident could have on the business is 
difficult to measure. This creates friction between the blue teams and their leaders since they 
can’t articulate the need for the controls

p.42  Some organizations use Governance, Risk, and Compliance (GRC) products 
to capture such metrics across various departments. On the other hand, Security Information and 
Event Management (SIEM) solutions can also be used to gather KRIs, measure and record them, and 
then present the data in the form of statistics on dashboards inside those security products. Robotic 
Process Automation (RPA) can also be used. RPA is where technology is used to execute specified 
tasks. Here, rule-based activities are performed to interact with existing applications. 

---------------RISK ASSESSMENT (3)

p.44 Following the NIST methodology
In this part, we will focus on the National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) methodology 
and how it shapes an organization. According to various experts, the NIST methodology is one of the 
most prominent methodologies used in the world today. 
The Department of Defense (DoD) in the United States released version 1.0 of its NIST 800-171 
Assessment methodology on November 7, 2019, because of a cyberattack on the DoD Navy submarine 
program in 2018, which caused a critical breach. Version 1.2 is the latest version at the time of writing 
and was released on June 10, 2020. Contractors first anticipated such a risk assessment methodology 
in January 2019, when Ellen Lord, Under Secretary of Defense for Acquisition and Sustainment, 
tasked the Defense Contract Management Agency (DCMA) with auditing the compliance of DoD 
contractors with the requirements of NIST 800-171. Of course, this was not the only reason why the 
DoD changed the NIST methodology. Attackers are becoming more prominent today and the world 
is changing, and information security methodologies need to change with it.
To generalize this methodology, there are six steps according to NIST involved in a Risk Management 
Framework (RMF), which are as follows (as shown in Figure 3.1):
1. Identify: Essential activities to prepare an organization to manage security and privacy risks. 
Preparation can be the hardest topic regarding risk management, but once that is completed, a 
company is ready, ready to manage risk and achieve an RMF. The organization should identify 
and categorize the systems and information processed, stored, and transmitted, based on impact 
analysis. This impact analysis includes asset inventory, risk calculation, and threat identification.
2. Select: Select the set of NIST SP 800-53 controls to protect a system based on risk assessment(s). 
This is the most important step in an RMF, selecting what controls are needed for an enterprise. 
Due to complexity and impact, choosing controls is generally reserved for top management 
executives who have the experience required to build a system according to risk assessments, 
which can give an understanding of both where the organization stands financially and technically 
– does the organization have the right people regarding the tools that were chosen or not?
3. Implement: Implement controls and document how those controls are deployed. This can be 
accomplished by the risk management team, who use the systems we identified before and 
who can explain what each system does, and finally, how those systems should be secured. 
Documentation in this case is important so that if a control fails, we can find out effortlessly. 
4. Assess: Assess to determine whether controls are in place, operating as intended, and producing 
the desired results. This can be completed by the risk management team, but it is preferable to 
include other teams in this procedure. 
5. Authorize: A senior official, usually a Chief Information Security Officer (CISO), makes a 
risk-based decision to authorize a system to operate. Unquestionably, the CISO has the final say, 
but if the team is not sure that the system will work, the CISO should be open to all suggestions 
and changes to the implementation before authorizing anything to go live.
6. Monitor: Continuously monitor control implementation and risks to a system by implementing 
risk assessments.

p.59 Defining and implementing strategy is a Chief Information Security Officer’s (CISO) responsibility 
when they enter an organization. What that means is that someone must predict a company’s impact 
regarding information security and that will be the CISO. When all risk assessments are completed 
without any controls in place yet, that is when the time comes for a defense strategy. 
Defense strategy includes the controls and procedures required to secure an organization. In this 
chapter, we will learn how to build strategic procedures and place controls in an organization’s perimeter 
and within the organization itself. Strategic thinking must be followed by strategic action; each time 
we deem something as important, we have to build toward that goal. 

p.60 The blue team doesn’t exclusively mitigate attacks, but they strengthen an entire digital infrastructure by 
performing vulnerability assessments and making sure that other teams can work without interruption 
from outside forces. 

p.61 Applications, like infrastructure, require measures so that the blue team can apply for better information 
security during the development and production phases. Applications can also be vendor-related, but 
we already covered that in the previous section. 
Because the vulnerability landscape changes drastically every single day, after the development of 
the product is complete, the blue team has to do vulnerability assessments at regular intervals and 
submit bugs to the developers, who have to make sure those bugs are covered. In this case, a great 
methodology to use is kanban. Through kanban, the blue team can ensure that the development team 
has a kanban board that they can use to report any bug. The blue team can fill the board with work 
items so that the team can choose which one to work on at a specific time and where to place it in the 
work in progress of the Kanban board. After the work in progress is complete, the team can evaluate 
again whether the vulnerability is covered by scanning for the vulnerability again. If the vulnerability 
is not found, then the work item can move to a done or complete column. The blue team must 
remember that vulnerability assessments are a continuous process, not a one-time deal. Covering a 
vulnerability doesn’t mean the threat is over; it might even open the software to new threats that need 
to be addressed before any incident occurs. Sometimes, software or programming library updates 
introduce new vulnerabilities that need to be constantly monitored, both during the development 
and production phases of the software life cycle

p.63 When talking about systems, we are not just referring to computers but also other types of information 
technology, such as scanners or other mobile technologies.
A system is considered a generic supporting methodology or technology used by businesses that, if 
implemented, can lead to any results required by the business. It can be anything. Blue teams have to 
ensure that those systems are safe and protected from any alterations to their normal usage. Those 
alterations could be changes to camera footage, deletion of camera footage, changes in code for 
scanners, and so on. 
If those situations happen, the business will likely lose revenue, and disasters and incidents will occur, 
which can be avoided if the blue team remains vigilant and creates measures that will not allow any 
external users to access the systems and ensure internal users are really careful when using any of 
the systems.

p.64 The real point of endpoint security is to prevent hackers from accessing any systems that endpoint 
users might have access to. In order to secure an endpoint, we have to place the right controls internally 
and externally with the same methods we used for the infrastructure and systems. The blue team takes 
care of those endpoints, making sure that they can monitor those systems. Of course, installing those 
systems should be the work of the service desk team, but if the team is not big enough, the blue team 
can handle the installations as well. 

Commonly, when endpoints have moved outside an organization’s premises, they tend to be harder to 
regulate, monitor and control; however there are systems that can do those three things – for example, 
Remote Access Control (RAC) for different purposes, such as installing the software needed for 
the business, fixing computer issues remotely, and doing service desk-related procedures without 
a physical presence in the home-working area.

p.65 Cloud security is an area where blue teams can always receive help from other teams, usually related 
to the cloud vendor. There are three different types of services, Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS), 
Platforms-as-a-service (PaaS), and Software-as-a-Service (SaaS). The way this works is that a blue 
team can be given areas that they have to cover. No type of service is the same and there can’t be two 
types for one infrastructure. However, there are some similarities between the different types. Of those 
similarities, the first one is the abstraction, pooling, and sharing of scalable computer resources across 
a network. Every type of service also allows cloud computing, which is the act of running workloads 
within that system. Using a unique mix of technologies, every cloud is almost always created with an 
Operating System (OS), a management platform, and Application Programming Interfaces (APIs). 
Virtualization and automation software can also be added to increase the efficiency and capabilities 
of every kind of cloud service.

cloud service types: IaaS, PaaS, SaaS

p.66 Traditionally, public clouds always run off-premises, but today’s Public Cloud Providers (PCPs) 
have started offering cloud services on clients’ on-premise data centers. This has made location and 
ownership distinctions obsolete. 
Regarding public clouds, they can be used by abstracting the bare-metal IT infrastructure used by 
cloud providers and being sold as IaaS, or they can be developed into a cloud platform sold as PaaS.
The next type of cloud is the private cloud. Private clouds are defined as cloud environments, solely 
dedicated to a single end user or group, where the environment runs behind the end user or group’s 
firewall. All clouds become private clouds when the underlying IT infrastructure is dedicated to 
a single customer with isolated access. This type of cloud is not just sourced from on-premises IT 
infrastructure, but organizations are also now building private clouds on rented, vendor-owned data 
centers located off-premises, which makes any location and ownership rules obsolete. This has led to 
many subtypes of private cloud, including the following:
• Managed private clouds
• Dedicated clouds
In the first subtype of a private cloud, customers create and use a private cloud that is deployed, 
configured, and managed by a third-party vendor. Those clouds are a cloud delivery option that 
helps enterprises with understaffed or underskilled IT teams to provide better private cloud services 
and infrastructure.
The second subtype of a private cloud, a dedicated cloud, is a cloud within another cloud. One way to 
have a dedicated cloud is to place it on a public cloud or a private cloud. For example, an accounting 
department can have its own dedicated cloud within the organization’s private cloud. 
The following type of cloud is a hybrid cloud. This is an ostensibly single IT environment created from 
multiple environments, connected through Local Area Networks (LANs), Wide Area Networks
(WANs), Virtual Private Networks (VPNs), and/or APIs.

p.68 When thinking about defense strategy, it is not always apparent that the workplace where we work 
is parallel to a battlefield, and therefore we can’t predict certain types of behavior in the workplace. 
Organizations have been struggling with the notion of trust for many years, and what they have found 
out is that commitment to the company’s goals and objectives should be rewarded. Certainly, rewarding 
employees with bonuses is one of the ways to prevent insider threats. However, if employees are not 
trained properly, then the issue is bigger than we realize. We see many mistakes made by employees 
that lead to insider threats. 

p.69 The steps that the blue team must take in order to have better protection 
against insider threats are as follows:
• Gain stakeholders’ buy-in to invest in an insider threat prevention program. The CISO can 
facilitate this step by speaking to the board members at their meetings.
• Follow zero-trust principles to address insider risk. As mentioned previously, zero trust can be 
a great measure to prevent risks like these but usually only for bigger organizations. For smaller 
teams, building trust is really important.
• Build a dedicated function to address insider risk. The blue team has to divide its functions 
between outsider protection and insider protection. Of course, for smaller teams, the blue 
team can be used, but for bigger organizations, there has to be a dedicated group that takes 
care of insider threats. 
• Create processes for an insider risk program and follow them. Strict policies should be 
implemented and followed. Every investigation should be treated as if it will end up in court, 
and policies must be applied consistently. 
• Implement a comprehensive data security solution. A complete solution goes beyond Data 
Layer Protection (DLP) to include monitoring, advanced analytics, and automated response to 
incidents, thus preventing unauthorized, accidental, or malicious data access. The technologies 
deployed by the organization must support its objectives and the goals of the blue team, taking 
into regard the processes created in the last step and the mandate of the insider risk function.

p.70 Responsibilities in blue team operations
Blue teams operate in many information security sectors. Let’s look at them one by one. 
The CISO, who is the lead of the blue team, always stands in every sector as the product owner to 
those sectors: 
1. Firstly, the infrastructure sector: Here, we see network security personnel whose prime 
function is to prevent attackers from disrupting operations and getting data out of payloads. 
This personnel includes firewall monitoring analysts, network operation analysts, network 
engineers, and cybersecurity engineers. Generally, their goal is to protect the network and stop 
interruptions to the operations of that network or infrastructure.
2. Secondly, the system sector: Here, we have operational personnel who handle the systems of 
an organization, making sure that everything works as planned and no one strays away from 
normal operations. Roles deriving from this sector include operations analysts, systems analysts, 
and cybersecurity analysts. 
3. Thirdly, the endpoint sector: Here, we have monitoring personnel and other types of information 
security analysts who work to protect end users from outside threats. Roles deriving from this 
sector can include service desk personnel who report to cybersecurity analysts, who will track 
their reports. 
4. Fourthly, the cloud sector: In this sector, there are people who handle the operations of the 
cloud, making sure that everything works as it should. This can include roles such as cloud 
security analysts, infrastructure analysts, and cybersecurity analysts. 
5. Lastly, the internal security sector: In this sector, the entire function works toward one 
goal – the prevention and mitigation of insider threats. This can include roles such as human 
relations analysts, security awareness officers, HR analysts, and cybersecurity analysts. 

p.74 The Cyber Kill Chain is an adaptation of a military kill chain. It is a step-by-step process used to 
identify and contain enemy activity – a systematic approach to identifying and eradicating it
Recon - Weaponize - Deliver - Exploit - Install - Command & Control - Action
Phases:
1. Recon
2.Weaponization
3.Delivery
4.Exploitation
5.Installation
6.Command and control
7.Actions on objective

p.84 There are also several different types of insider threats and the who and why behind these incidents 
can vary. According to one study, we see the following:
• Neglectful insiders are the most common vectors and account for 62% of all incidents
• Neglectful insiders who have their credentials stolen account for 25% of all incidents
• Hostile insiders are responsible for 14% of all incidents

Different types of cyber threat actors: hobbyists, cybercriminals, hacktivists, corporate espionage

p.89 Organizations have a legal obligation to report how they handle and store information related to 
their customers as a result of the California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA) and the General Data 
Protection Regulation (GDPR). Organizations struggle to meet deadlines for these requests without 
adequate processes in place, which places them in a vulnerable position. Aside from this, organizations 
can also face heavy fines if they fail to comply with regulatory requirements for matters such as the 
ethical storage of data. Fines of over £150 million were issued under the GDPR in 2020 alone.

p.92 One of the most important things to consider when talking about governance is defining who the 
stakeholders are and what their activity in the organization is. There can be two types of stakeholders:
• Internal stakeholders
• External stakeholders
The governance team should identify internal stakeholders as corporate directors and employees who 
are involved in the corporate governance process.
External stakeholders, on the other hand, may include creditors, auditors, customers, suppliers, 
government agencies, and the public at large.

p.97 The CSF was released in February 2014 as voluntary guidance based on existing standards and practices 
for critical infrastructure for companies to improve their security risk management. It is considered 
the gold standard for building cybersecurity programs, along with being a scalable and customizable 
approach that can work in organizations of any size across many industries.
The framework covers 23 categories and 108 security controls organizing cybersecurity into 5 core 
functions that we will see mentioned in many parts of this book:
• Identify – Involves assessing and uncovering cybersecurity risks to systems, assets, data, and 
capabilities. We’ve covered this part in Chapter 3, Risk Assessment.
• Protect – Involves developing and implementing safeguards and controls to ensure the delivery 
of critical infrastructure needs. This is covered in Chapter 8, Detective Controls.
• Detect – Involves developing activities and controls to monitor and detect cybersecurity events. 
This is covered in Chapter 9, Cyber Threat Intelligence.
• Respond – This is considered a red team’s bread and butter, but a blue team member should 
also be able to control and mitigate cybersecurity incidents.
• Recovery – Involves developing and implementing processes to restore capabilities when and 
if an incident/disaster occurs. This is covered in Chapter 10, Incident Response and Recovery.
The CSF can help organizations address key security challenges in their technological environments, 
such as the following:
• Uncovering hidden risks and vulnerabilities
• Leveraging the right tools and resources to address risks
• Prioritizing risks to focus on critical threats
• Understanding which assets need protectio

p.99 (NIST) There are seven steps to complete regularly:
1. Continually test and review.
2. Keep documentation up to date.
3. Perform internal audits.
4. Keep senior management informed.
5. Establish a regular management review process.
6. Stay on top of corrective actions.
7. Promote ongoing information security staff awareness.

p.110 A preventive control, or preventative control, is a safeguard that is put in place with the intention 
of preventing a security incident. The purpose of taking preventative measures is to eliminate or 
reduce as much as possible the potential of a breach, which will inevitably lead to an impact on the 
organization and the business.
A preventive control makes an effort to thwart any unauthorized efforts to make a change or access 
a system. This helps preserve the confidentiality, integrity, and availability of IT assets. Hence, a blue 
team needs to deploy the appropriate level of controls and safeguards, per the risk assessment of each 
IT asset in its scope.
Moreover, any controls in the organization will need to be regularly monitored and updated to ensure 
they are running at optimal levels and that the changing needs of the business, the industry, and the 
threat landscape are taken into due consideration

types: administrative, physical, technical/logical

p.113 Policy management is required to ensure there is one single strategy and one consistent approach 
enforced across the organization. Hence, this is usually the first step that is taken before embarking 
on the journey of getting the relevant controls in place. (ex: SANS Institute)

p.116 Network control refers to the act of stopping unapproved individuals and devices from joining a 
private network. This can be accomplished by restricting access to the network. Organizations that 
occasionally grant access to some users or devices from outside the network to their network could 
use Network Access Control (NAC) to guarantee that these devices comply with corporate security 
compliance standards
NAC is one of the elements that contribute to the overall security of a computer network. Although 
there is a great deal of NAC software available, the tasks are often carried out by a network access 
server. An effective NAC system limits users’ connectivity to only those devices for which authorization 
has been granted and which satisfy all applicable security requirements. This should include checks 
to verify that all required security updates and controls have been installed on these devices. The 
operators of the network are responsible for defining security policies that are used to evaluate if 
a device or application satisfies the requirements of endpoint security standards and is, as a result, 
permitted to connect to the network.
The use of MFA could also be considered and either mandated or recommended to the user. This is 
a much more secure method of authentication. Alternatively, for devices, a digital certificate could 
also be used to uniquely identify authorized assets. 
In more advanced setups, two layers of controls may be applied at the NAC level:
• Pre-admission: This takes place before the user or endpoint device is granted access to the 
network. This is because it takes place before the user or endpoint device makes a request 
to enter the network. The pre-admission network control evaluates the access attempt and 
decides whether or not to grant access based on whether or not the user or device making the 
request can demonstrate that they are in compliance with the corporate security policy and 
are authorized to access the network.
• Post-admission: A procedure that is carried out inside of the network and given the name 
post-admission NAC occurs whenever a user or device that has previously been granted access 
to the network attempts to access a different part of the network. In that case, the NAC will be 
able to censor lateral displacement inside the network and decrease the amount of damage that 
is caused by a cyber-attack. Users and devices are needed to reauthenticate themselves every 
time they submit a request to move to a different part of the network. This ensures that only 
authorized users and devices may access the network

p.118 Some common controls around data security are outlined here: 
• Data encryption: This helps ensure data is protected both at rest on the servers and databases, 
as well as in motion when being moved between various computing resources or while on the 
way to the endpoints.
• Data retention: This policy mandates the secure deletion of the organization’s data when it is 
no longer needed. Such controls ensure the risk footprint is reduced.
• Data backups: This is also a crucial control to ensure that any important data is regularly backed 
up and is available in the event of any outage or incident. This helps with recovery efforts.
• Secure disposal: Before any laptops, hard disks, or any other hardware are disposed of, they 
should go through a secure data erasure process. This will ensure any organizational data is 
securely deleted and cannot be recovered by any adversary.

p.119 Endpoint security controls
This layer refers to the practice of securing the endpoints or entry points of end-user devices such 
as desktop computers, laptop computers, and mobile devices in order to prevent them from being 
exploited by malicious actors and campaigns.
Examples of end systems include desktops and laptops, as well as tablets and mobile devices. Some 
organizations may even have Point-Of-Sale (POS) systems, printers, cameras, and other assets. 
Endpoint safety is also referred to as endpoint protection. It is important to remember that these 
endpoints could be employee-owned personal devices, corporate-owned devices, or employee-owned 
but corporate-managed assets.
More and more organizations have moved on to a hybrid work environment, increasing the use of a 
Bring Your Own Device (BYOD) culture, making these endpoints more attractive to attackers. This 
has increased access to endpoints for attackers. Unsecured and unmonitored endpoints can access 
your assets or your organization’s confidential information. This enables attackers to expose your data 
or take it hostage for any unlawful activity.

p.123 Just as with preventive controls, detective controls too could be classified into the same three broad 
categories. However, once again, it is important to note that in real-life instances, it is likely that one 
control may spread across more than one category. Blue teams’ mission should be selecting the right 
controls that are most applicable to their respective organizations:
• Physical controls include measures to detect any unauthorized access to a physical building, 
location, or IT assets. This includes controls such as fences, locks, security guards, security 
alarms, CCTVs, cameras, motion sensors, and so on. The fundamental intention here is to 
look for and record any physical breaches where the intruder may have been able to evade the 
preventive physical controls.
• Technical/logical controls include technical measures to protect IT assets. This could include 
Intrusion Detection Systems (IDS), access logs, data backups, honeypots, and so on. The 
value of these controls is to log and detect any unauthorized access to the organization’s data 
or systems. This helps look for any intrusion where the threat actor was able to bypass the 
preventive technical controls. Controls such as vulnerability assessments and penetration tests 
also fall in this category.
• Administrative controls include mandatory leave and job rotation for staff, to detect any 
intentional fraud or espionage by internal staff. Most organizations mandate regular independent 
audits or even external audits to review the security posture of the organization and identify 
gaps. This helps act as an administrative detective control as well.

p.124 A SOC is a team of information security professionals that collaborate to monitor, identify, evaluate, 
and investigate any potential cybersecurity hazards posed to an organization. When looking for signs 
of a cyber breach, continuous scans of computer networks, websites, computers, end-user devices, 
and all IT assets are regularly conducted. This helps identify any potential vulnerabilities and, most 
importantly, any attempts being made to breach the security controls. The SOC is in charge of looking 
at massive amounts of logs, coming in from every security product and every control deployed by the 
blue team. It needs to develop rules and identify any exceptions or threats. Next, incident response 
processes need to be maintained and regularly tested to ensure any breach can be timely managed 
and contained.
In some organizations, the blue team could consist of a SOC role as well. For some other organizations, 
it would be imperative for the blue team to work closely with the SOC. Typically, the requirements and 
monitoring use cases would come in from the blue team and are implemented by the SOC. However, 
the blue team also needs to monitor the latest threats, trends, and reports from the SOC to understand 
the changing threat landscape and, moreover, to monitor the organization’s known vulnerabilities. This 
will help the blue team design and upgrade the required security controls, to ensure the organization 
is well protected from the latest threats.

vuln testing, pen testing, red teaming, bug bounties, source code scanning, complience or hardening scans

tools for defective controls:

TIP: osint, socint, humint, dwi
SOAR tools
SIEM tools
DF tools

p.134 Cyber Threat Intelligence (CTI) can be defined as data that is collected, processed, and analyzed to 
understand a threat actor’s motives, targets, and attack behaviors. The fundamental objective of CTI 
is to enable an organization to make faster and better-informed decisions and to help the blue team 
become proactive in their defense efforts
Some popular sources to consider are the following:
• Information Sharing and Analysis Centers (ISACs)
• Information Sharing and Analysis Organizations (ISAOs)
• Vendors – Subscriptions are available, which are either product agnostic or may even be specific 
to a certain tool/product
• OSINT – Open Source Intelligence feeds, available freely online
• Government, Computer Emergency Response Team (CERTs), and regulators – Information
disseminated by official channel

types of threat intell: stif, tactical threat intell, operational threat intell

Threat intelligence implementation: developing a plan, collection, processing, analysis, dissemination, feedback

p.144 The MITRE ATT&CK framework currently has three iterations: 
• Enterprise: Focuses on servers and infrastructure, both on-premises and in the cloud
• Mobile: Focuses on the behavior on iOS and Android operating systems 
• ICS: Focuses on industrial control systems and the actions an adversary may take there 

p.148 An incident response plan is really important because without it, the teams working on any project 
will find themselves in a really hard situation when responding to incidents. For example, a team was 
building an application and had already launched that web application online. One night, a serious 
Distributed Denial-of-Service (DDoS) attack coincided with a network intrusion and the team had 
no idea how to respond to that attack. The developers did everything they could to stop the attack 
from occurring but lost important data that was on the server at the time. This is where Blue teams 
come in. The Blue Team member who is assigned this case should follow the procedure in place and 
document any action. Stopping a DDoS attack, along with intrusion attempts, is not that simple. 
However, following procedure is a must and a plan must have already been written by the CISO or 
any other team member who handles planning. 

p.153 During the next subsections we will be giving a better understanding of how a Blue Team follows a 
specific playbook to address the attacks specified in each subsection. Most of the steps are the same but 
they can follow different ways of determining how an attack is classified. In the following subsections 
we will be putting forward the following playbooks:
• Ransomware Attacks Playbook
• Data Loss/Theft Attacks Playbook
• Phishing Attacks Playbook

p.166 Disaster recovery plans have almost the same structure as incident response plans, but let’s see it on 
a part-by-part level again. 
A disaster recovery plan consists of the following parts:
• Purpose
• System/application name and description
• Recovery parameters
• Recovery team
• Definitions
• Disaster recovery plan procedure
• Revision histor

p.170 Cyber security insurance, also referred to as cyber insurance or cyber liability insurance, is a deal that 
an organization can take out to mitigate the financial risks involved in online business. For a monthly 
or quarterly fee, the insurance transfers a portion of the risk to the insurance provider.
Cyber insurance is a new and emerging industry. Companies that purchase this type of cybersecurity 
insurance are now considered to be early adopters. Cyber security policies can change month to 
month as the associated cyber risks are dynamic and fluctuating. Unlike established insurance plans, 
cybersecurity insurance policy insurers only have limited data to shape risk models to establish 
insurance coverages, rates, and premiums.
Cyber insurance has its genesis in Errors and Omissions (E&O) insurance, a category of separate 
insurance that protects against errors and defects in the services provided by an organization. E&O 
insurance is similar to product liability insurance for companies that are selling products, either 
physical or digital.

p.175 we need to understand that prioritizing and implementing a blue team requires us to 
look into the different ways that this blue team can be utilized. We will be mentioning some emerging 
detection and prevention technologies and techniques, including the following:
• Adversary emulation with some examples
• A Virtual Chief Information Security Officer (VCISO)
• Context-aware security
• Defensive AI
• Extended detection and response
• Manufacturer usage description
• Zero Trust
