Develop foundational skills in ethical hacking and penetration testing while getting ready to pass the certification exam

Key Features
Learn how to look at technology from the standpoint of an attacker
Understand the methods that attackers use to infiltrate networks
Prepare to take and pass the exam in one attempt with the help of hands-on examples and mock tests
Book Description
With cyber threats continually evolving, understanding the trends and using the tools deployed by attackers to determine vulnerabilities in your system can help secure your applications, networks, and devices. To outmatch attacks, developing an attacker's mindset is a necessary skill, which you can hone with the help of this cybersecurity book.

This study guide takes a step-by-step approach to helping you cover all the exam objectives using plenty of examples and hands-on activities. You'll start by gaining insights into the different elements of InfoSec and a thorough understanding of ethical hacking terms and concepts. You'll then learn about various vectors, including network-based vectors, software-based vectors, mobile devices, wireless networks, and IoT devices. The book also explores attacks on emerging technologies such as the cloud, IoT, web apps, and servers and examines prominent tools and techniques used by hackers. Finally, you'll be ready to take mock tests, which will help you test your understanding of all the topics covered in the book.

By the end of this book, you'll have obtained the information necessary to take the 312-50 exam and become a CEH v11 certified ethical hacker.

What you will learn
Get to grips with information security and ethical hacking
Undertake footprinting and reconnaissance to gain primary information about a potential target
Perform vulnerability analysis as a means of gaining visibility of known security weaknesses
Become familiar with the tools and techniques used by an attacker to hack into a target system
Discover how network sniffing works and ways to keep your information secure
Explore the social engineering techniques attackers use to compromise systems
Who this book is for
This ethical hacking book is for security professionals, site admins, developers, auditors, security officers, analysts, security consultants, and network engineers. Basic networking knowledge (Network+) and at least two years of experience working within the InfoSec domain are expected.

Table of Contents
Understanding Ethical Hacking
Introduction to Reconnaissance
Reconnaissance – A Deeper Dive
Scanning Networks
Enumeration
Vulnerability Analysis
System Hacking
Social Engineering
Malware and Other Digital Attacks
Sniffing and Evading IDS, Firewalls, and Honeypots
Hacking Wireless Networks
Hacking Mobile Platforms
Hacking Web Servers and Web Apps
Hacking IoT and OT
Cloud Computing
Using Cryptography
CEH Exam Practice Questions
