Set up next-generation firewalls from Palo Alto Networks and get to grips with configuring and troubleshooting using the PAN-OS platform

Key Features
Understand how to optimally use PAN-OS features
Build firewall solutions to safeguard local, cloud, and mobile networks
Protect your infrastructure and users by implementing robust threat prevention solutions
Book Description
To safeguard against security threats, it is crucial to ensure that your organization is effectively secured across networks, mobile devices, and the cloud. Palo Alto Networks' integrated platform makes it easy to manage network and cloud security along with endpoint protection and a wide range of security services. With this book, you'll understand Palo Alto Networks and learn how to implement essential techniques, right from deploying firewalls through to advanced troubleshooting.

The book starts by showing you how to set up and configure the Palo Alto Networks firewall, helping you to understand the technology and appreciate the simple, yet powerful, PAN-OS platform. Once you've explored the web interface and command-line structure, you'll be able to predict expected behavior and troubleshoot anomalies with confidence. You'll learn why and how to create strong security policies and discover how the firewall protects against encrypted threats. In addition to this, you'll get to grips with identifying users and controlling access to your network with user IDs and even prioritize traffic using quality of service (QoS). The book will show you how to enable special modes on the firewall for shared environments and extend security capabilities to smaller locations.

By the end of this network security book, you'll be well-versed with advanced troubleshooting techniques and best practices recommended by an experienced security engineer and Palo Alto Networks expert.

What you will learn
Perform administrative tasks using the web interface and command-line interface (CLI)
Explore the core technologies that will help you boost your network security
Discover best practices and considerations for configuring security policies
Run and interpret troubleshooting and debugging commands
Manage firewalls through Panorama to reduce administrative workloads
Protect your network from malicious traffic via threat prevention
Who this book is for
This book is for network engineers, network security analysts, and security professionals who want to understand and deploy Palo Alto Networks in their infrastructure. Anyone looking for in-depth knowledge of Palo Alto Network technologies, including those who currently use Palo Alto Network products, will find this book useful. Intermediate-level network administration knowledge is necessary to get started with this cybersecurity book.

Table of Contents
Understanding the Core Technologies
Setting Up a New Device
Building Strong Policies
Taking Control of Sessions
Services and Operational Modes
Identifying Users and Controlling Access
Managing Firewalls through Panorama
Upgrading Firewalls and Panorama
Logging and Reporting
VPN and Advanced Protection
Troubleshooting Common Session Issues
A Deep Dive into Troubleshooting
Supporting Tools

p.23 Traditionally, when considering the firewall as an element of your network, most likely 
you will imagine a network design like the one in the following image, with two to four 
areas surrounding a box. Most of the time, whatever is placed in the north is considered 
dangerous, east and west are somewhat grey areas, and the south is the happy place where 
users do their daily tasks. The box in the middle is the firewall
In reality, a network design may look a lot more complex due to network segregation, 
segmentation, remote offices being connected to the headquarters via all sorts of different 
technologies, and the adoption of cloud vendors. 
In a route-based firewall, zones are simply an architectural or topological concept that 
helps identify which areas comprise the global network that is used by the company 
and are usually represented by tags that can be attached to a subnet object. They hold 
no bearing in any of the security decisions made by the system when processing 
security policies.
Understanding the zone-based firewall 5
The zone-based firewall, on the other hand, will use zones as a means to internally classify 
the source and destination in its state table. When a packet is first received, a source zone 
lookup is performed. If the source zone has a protection profile associated with it, the 
packet is evaluated against the profile configuration. If the first packet is a TCP packet, it 
will also be evaluated against TCP state where the first packet needs to be a SYN packet, 
and a SYN-cookie is triggered if the protection profile threshold is reached. Then, 
a destination zone is determined by checking the Policy-Based Forwarding (PBF)
rules and if no results are found, the routing table is consulted. Lastly, the NAT policy is 
evaluated as the destination IP may be changed by a NAT rule action, thereby changing 
the destination interface and zone in the routing table. This would require a secondary 
forwarding lookup to determine the post-NAT egress interface and zone

p.73 The RADIUS server profile
RADIUS is one of the more popular authentication methods and supports the following 
authentication protocols:
• PEAP-MSCHAPv2: Protected Extensible Authentication Protocol (PEAP) with 
Microsoft CHAP v2 provides improved security over PAP or CHAP by transmitting 
both the username and password in an encrypted tunnel.
• PEAP with Generic Token Card (GTC): PEAP with GTC enables the use of 
one-time tokens in an encrypted tunnel.
54 Setting Up a New Device
• EAP-TTLS with PAP: EAP with Tunneled Transport Layer Security (TTLS) and 
PAP is used to transport plain text credentials for PAP in an encrypted tunnel.
• CHAP: Used if the RADIUS server does not support EAP or PAP or is not 
configured for it.
• PAP: Used if the RADIUS server does not support EAP or CHAP or is not 
configured for it.
• Palo Alto Networks uses vendor code 25461.

p.74 The Kerberos server profile
The Kerberos server profile is very simple to configure as it only requires an IP or FQDN 
and a port number, but it does require a few specific configuration settings:
• The firewall needs to have the domain set from Device | Setup | Management | 
General Settings. 
• The firewall is synced to an NTP server from Device | Setup | Services so that its 
clock is in sync with the local ActiveDirectory server.
• Its DNS servers need to be set to internal DNS servers that are joined to the domain, 
rather than external DNS servers.

p.75 The SAML server profile
The SAML profile enables authentication against an external Single Sign-On (SSO) 
provider (such as PingID and Okta).
Your Identity Provider (IdP) should provide you with the following:
• An identifier so that it can certify whether the authentication session originates 
from you.
• The root and intermediary certificates, which you can load to Device | Certificate 
Management | Device Certificates to verify the identity of the SSO and Single Log 
Out (SLO) sites
• An SSO URL
• An SLO URL

p.130 Action options
There are multiple actions that handle inbound connections, some of which are stealthy 
and some of which are noisy and informative, depending on your needs:
• Deny: This action will drop the session and enforce the default Deny action 
associated with an application. Some applications may silently drop while others 
send an RST packet.
• Allow: This allows the session to go through.
• Drop: This silently discards packets.
• Reset Client: This sends a TCP RST to the client.
• Reset Server: This sends a TCP RST to the server.
• Reset Both: This sends a TCP RST to both the client and the server.
If you check the Send ICMP Unreachable checkbox and the ingress interface is Layer 
3, an ICMP Unreachable packet is sent to the client for all of the dropped TCP or UDP 
sessions.

p.137 Address objects
To make managing destinations in your security and NAT policy a little easier, you can 
create address objects by going to Objects | Addresses. When you create a new object 
here, you can reuse the same object in different rules, and if something changes, you 
only need to change the address object for all the security and NAT rules to be 
automatically updated:
1. Click on Add and provide a descriptive name for the address. It is good practice to 
set up a naming convention so that you can repeat this process for all other address 
objects. A good example is to prefix all server names with S_ and all networks with 
N_ so that they're easily identifiable.
2. Set a description if needed.
3. Select the type of object that this will be.
--IP Netmask lets you set an IP with a subnet mask down to /32 or /64 for a single 
IPv4 or Ipv6 address (no need to add /32).
--IP Range lets you define a range that includes all the IP addresses between the 
first and last IP set in the range, separated with a dash (-).
--IP Wildcard Mask lets you set a subnet masking that covers binary matches, 
where a zero bit requires an exact match in the IP bit, and 1 is a wildcard. So, for 
example, a wildcard subnet of 0.0.0.254 translates to 000000000.0000000.0
000000.11111110. the first three bytes are set and in the last byte, all but the first 
bit are wildcards. This means that if the associated IP address is set to 10.0.0.2
(00001010.0000000.000000.00000010), all of the IPs in the subnet that 
end in 0 will be matched (that is, all of the even IP addresses). If the IP is set to 
10.0.0.1, all of the odd IPs would match. This type of object can only be used in 
security rules.
--FQDN lets you set a domain name that the firewall will periodically resolve 
according to the Time To Live (TTL) and cache. Up to 10 A or AAAA records are 
supported for each FQDN object. Use the Resolve link to verify that the domain can 
be resolved.
4. Add a tag to easily identify and filter policies for this object.
5. Click OK.
Once you have sets of objects that are similar, you can also create groups by going to 
Objects | Address Groups. These groups can be used to bundle objects for use in security 
or other policies.

p.153 Controlling the bandwidth with quality of 
service policies
Quality of Service (QoS) is the collective name for several technologies that can 
help improve the quality of applications and the data flows that they are applied to by 
prioritizing them over other flows or reserving bandwidth to ensure adequate throughput 
and acceptable latency. In this section, you will learn how QoS marking can be applied to 
a firewall to interact with network devices downstream.
There are two ways for a firewall to participate in applying QoS to network traffic:
• Differentiated Services Code Point (DSCP) and Type of Service (ToS) headers 
• QoS enforcement through built-in capabilities

p.154 QoS enforcement in the firewall
The firewall can also enforce bandwidth restrictions or guarantees, and that's what we will 
focus on here. The Palo Alto Networks firewall uses a system of eight classes combined 
with policies. 
Each interface is set up with a QoS profile that mandates how each class is treated, and 
then policies are created to identify sessions as belonging to a certain class. The default 
class is class4, so anything that is not caught by a QoS rule will automatically become 
class4 and be subject to the restrictions for that class.
We'll use the following topology to build an example QoS policy:
• An internet link on eth1/1 with a download bandwidth of 200 Mbps per second 
and an upload bandwidth of 50 Mbps.
• A DMZ network containing some servers on eth1/2 connected to a 1 Gbps 
interface.
• A LAN where the users sit on eth1/3 connected to a 1 Gbps interface.
• Users need 20 Mbps of guaranteed upload and download bandwidth for their 
enterprise Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP), but some internet downloads need 
to be limited to 50 Mbps. 
• File share traffic between users and servers needs to be limited to 300 Mbps. 
• Site-to-site VPN connections need a 20 Mbps guarantee for business-critical 
applications.

p.190 Setting up high availability
High Availability (HA) is a configuration where two identical (the same chassis or 
VM version) firewalls are connected to form a cluster. When clustering is enabled, 
both systems will form a single entity to the outside and will handle failover for certain 
problems, so the service remains available to users. These types of monitoring are or can 
be performed in a cluster member to ensure its own and its peers' health:
• Link monitoring: If an interface goes down, the member fails.
• Path monitoring: If an IP becomes unavailable, the member fails.
Setting up high availability 171
• Heartbeat monitoring: The peers periodically send heartbeat packages and hello 
messages to verify they are up and running.
• Hardware monitoring: The member continually performs packet path health 
monitoring on its own hardware and fails if a malfunction is detected.
When you enable HA, you need to select a Group ID. This ID needs to be identical on 
both members. The Group ID will also have an impact on the MAC addresses associated 
with each interface as they switch to a virtual MAC that both firewalls will be able to claim 
via gratuitous ARP in case one member fails.
