Start your Cybersecurity career with expert advice on how to get certified, find your first job, and progress

Purchase of the print or Kindle book includes a free eBook in PDF format

Key Features
Learn how to follow your desired career path that results in a well-paid, rewarding job in cybersecurity
Explore expert tips relating to career growth and certification options
Access informative content from a panel of experienced cybersecurity experts
Book Description
Cybersecurity is an emerging career trend and will continue to become increasingly important. Despite the lucrative pay and significant career growth opportunities, many people are unsure of how to get started.

This book is designed by leading industry experts to help you enter the world of cybersecurity with confidence, covering everything from gaining the right certification to tips and tools for finding your first job. The book starts by helping you gain a foundational understanding of cybersecurity, covering cyber law, cyber policy, and frameworks. Next, you'll focus on how to choose the career field best suited to you from options such as security operations, penetration testing, and risk analysis. The book also guides you through the different certification options as well as the pros and cons of a formal college education versus formal certificate courses. Later, you'll discover the importance of defining and understanding your brand. Finally, you'll get up to speed with different career paths and learning opportunities.

By the end of this cyber book, you will have gained the knowledge you need to clearly define your career path and develop goals relating to career progression.

What you will learn
Gain an understanding of cybersecurity essentials, including the different frameworks and laws, and specialties
Find out how to land your first job in the cybersecurity industry
Understand the difference between college education and certificate courses
Build goals and timelines to encourage a work/life balance while delivering value in your job
Understand the different types of cybersecurity jobs available and what it means to be entry-level
Build affordable, practical labs to develop your technical skills
Discover how to set goals and maintain momentum after landing your first cybersecurity job
Who this book is for
This book is for college graduates, military veterans transitioning from active service, individuals looking to make a mid-career switch, and aspiring IT professionals. Anyone who considers cybersecurity as a potential career field but feels intimidated, overwhelmed, or unsure of where to get started will also find this book useful. No experience or cybersecurity knowledge is needed to get started.

Table of Contents
New Career in Cyber... “Who Dis?”
Which Career Field Is Best for You?
Different Strokes for Different Folks
Exploring Certifications and College
Getting Hands-On Experience with No Experience
Time to Brand Yourself – Not the Burning Type
How to Land a Jay-Oh-Bee!
Giving Back to Others and Yourself
Trusting the Process

p.27 Some terms you will hear often within cybersecurity are asset, vulnerability, risk, and 
threat. These are key terms you should learn and know. We will cover these briefly in this 
section
Here are their breakdowns: 
• Asset: This is anything in the environment that needs to be protected, such as data, 
people, proprietary tools, and processes essential for business operations. 
• Vulnerability: A weakness within your organization that can be exploited, such as 
flaws in software code and out-of-date software. 
• Risk: The likelihood or possibility a threat was successful in breaching your 
network, the risk would be the asset's total loss. The following is an example of the 
risk formula to identify your organization's risk: 
Risk = Threat x Vulnerability
• Threat: Anything that is trying to degrade, disrupt, or steal your asset is a threat. 
This would include cybercriminals or insider threats. 
The preceding is not an inclusive list, it is the basics to help you get started. We encourage 
you to dig further into each of these to understand their roles within cybersecurity. Next, 
we will discuss the CIA Triad.

The CIA Triad is not the Central Intelligence Agency composed of US government 
employees who provide national security intelligence to congressional leaders in America. 
The CIA Triad in cyber means Confidentiality, Integrity, and Availability. These are the 
core pillars of information security (InfoSec) a subset of cybersecurity. Throughout this 
chapter, we will focus on the CIA Triad three pillars as they are foundational elements of 
InfoSec. 

p.29 Countermeasures to help reduce the likelihood of a data breach and increase 
confidentially would include the following: 
• Access control list
• File and volume encryption 
• Authentication through software to control access 
• Administrative policies 
• Continuing employee training and awareness 
• Physical hardenings such as cameras and access control

p.31 The first cybersecurity framework we will discuss is NIST. NIST stands for National 
Institute of Standards and Technology. NIST is a framework that helps a company 
develop organizational controls and risk management for their information security 
program.

The NIST framework is broken into three parts: 
• Framework Core
• Implementation Tiers
• Framework Profiles 

p.32 The Framework Core is made up of five functions. The easiest way to remember them 
is to think of Identify and Protect as the organization's actions to prepare itself against 
a cyberattack. Detect, Response, and Recover are all the things you will do after a breach 
or incident occurs. 
The five core functions are as follows: 
1. Identify: Manages risks by correctly understanding assets, data, and other resources. 
2. Protect: Protocols and countermeasures in place to protect critical infrastructure.
3. Detect: Defines what makes an event versus regular network activity. 
4. Respond: Response to events through predefined actions. 
5. Recover: Recovery processes for repair services and network. 
If you want to learn more about NIST and download the framework's Core Function and 
Category spreadsheet, you can visit https://www.nist.gov/ and search for NIST 
Framework. 

p.33 SOC2 stands for Service Organization Control Type 2 and is a cybersecurity framework 
and auditing standard developed by the American Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants (AICPA) to ensure organizations are securely managing client and vendor 
data. NIST and SOC2 may appear to be opposite sides of the same coin; both are designed 
to review an organization's internal controls.


p.37 Some of the techniques used for password hacking includes brute-force and dictionary 
attacks: 
• Brute-force attack is when the attacker will rely on guessing, often through 
automation, and attempting as many times as possible. Typically the guesses are 
attributed back to the user's likes and hobbies. If your password is complex enough, 
it will take a long time to crack it. 
• Dictionary attack is when the attacker attempts to use the most common 
passwords.

p.37 A cross-site scripting attack happens when a user goes to a legitimate website that 
was injected with malicious code. When the victim visits this website, the website will 
transmit the page with the attack payload in an HTML text. Then the malicious script will 
execute on the host machine. The outcome could be seen by stealing cookies, capturing 
screenshots, and logging keystrokes by prompting the user to log in again.

p.38 An eavesdropping attack is also known as a snooping or sniffing attack. Unlike the 
Man-in-the-Middle attack, an eavesdropping attacker listens either passively or actively 
to the user's network. They listen to the network traffic to find data such as credit card info 
or passwords. The best prevention against this type of attack is MFA and overall system 
encryption.

p.38 Attackers have been using rogue software attacks since 2008. The attacker will lure 
its victims by making them think they have a virus on their machine. Once they have 
struck panic in the victim, they will convince them to pay for a removal tool that is 
masquerading as legitimate software. 
The vector for this type of attack can be when a user goes to a website and suddenly sees 
a popup saying, "Your system has been infected with malware, act now, click here to conduct 
a virus scan." Once the victim clicks, depending on the victims antivirus, the download 
begins. Another name for the malware used in this type of an attack is called scareware
because the purpose is to scare the victim into reacting quickly. 

Main domains (Area): Risk Assessment (Offensive Security), Governance (GRC), Threat Intelligence (External Threat Intell, Internal Threat Intell), Security Operation (Incident Response), Security Operation (Incident Response), Security Architecture (Cloud Security), Learning (Education, Training, Awareness)

p.52 Traditionally, companies tend to patch vulnerabilities after incidents have happened as 
they were not informed about those weaknesses in their systems, or they were informed, 
but had other work prioritized, which eventually resulted in serious cyberattacks that 
cost not only their reputation, but also their finances, and possibly other factors. As a 
result, over time, companies have learned that this method is not very effective to protect 
themselves from cyber criminals. As a result, Offensive Security came to the rescue. 
Offensive Security refers to a proactive risk assessment approach, where cybersecurity 
professionals actively look for potential vulnerabilities that organizations might 
experience in the future. By performing Offensive Security techniques, companies can 
discover and patch their systems' shortcomings before any actual attacks occur. To do so, 
companies hire individuals or groups of experienced ethical hackers to hack their systems 
legally and purposefully, by simulating the mindsets and actions of cyber criminals. This 
helps address system weaknesses before they go into production, so they can implement 
the appropriate security protocol immediately. Offensive Security can be applied to not 
only systems, but also to applications, software, and more. 

p.55 Organizations follow certain cybersecurity regulations and practices. To ensure that 
those cybersecurity laws and resources are implemented correctly and effectively, more 
than just a couple of IT employees are required. In fact, to have constructive and strategic 
cybersecurity policies implemented, involvement by a company's management is essential. 
This is known as cybersecurity governance. 

The foundations of creating well-strategized cybersecurity practices is a combination 
of Governance, Risk Management, and Compliance, commonly known as GRC. 

p.56 Cyber criminals never sleep. As cyber specialists discover and eliminate existing cyber 
attacks, cyber criminals come up with new ways and tools to perform new attacks. Thus, 
cyber threats are always in existence, if not increasing. As a result, companies and Threat 
Intelligence Analysts need to be ahead of the game by staying posted about the most 
recent attacks, business trends, and even global news. This helps them analyze, predict, 
and prevent existing and potential cyber attacks. The practice of improving cybersecurity 
safeguards through sharing, learning, analyzing, and forecasting cyber threats and 
adversaries is known as Cyber Threat Intel. 

p.58 Let's look at what they mean: 
• Strategic Threat Intelligence: Strategic Threat Intelligence focuses on the
non-technical aspects of the threats, which are their risks, impacts, and effects on 
the organizations. This is meant to help management levels with cyber defense 
decision making. Often, this information is exchanged with GRC analysts so that 
they can discuss the appropriate risk assessment and mitigation actions. 
In contrast, both Tactical and Operational Threat Intelligence are tailored toward 
technical audiences. 
• Tactical Threat Intelligence: Tactical Threat Intelligence addresses the tactics of 
threat actors, such as the procedure of the attack, which vulnerabilities attackers are 
looking for, or which entry points attackers might use to compromise the system. 
• Operational Threat Intelligence: Operational Threat Intelligence provides 
in-depth and highly technical details of the threat. Information can be found are the 
motives of the attack, the tools and techniques attackers might use, or indicators of 
compromises, such as IP address, filenames, type of malware, and so on. 

p.59 • Internal Threat Intel: Internal Threat Intel refers to the intelligence sources coming 
from within the organization. This could be past incidents and incident response 
reports and plans, security policies and practices, discovered vulnerabilities, 
and so on. 
• External Threat Intel: The opposite of Internal Threat Intel, External Threat Intel 
is the threat resources coming from outside the organization. This includes Open 
Source Intelligence, Technical Intelligence, and others

p.60 Security Operation is the discipline of ensuring that an organization's business is not 
interrupted by detecting, preventing, protecting, and responding to cybersecurity threats 
and attacks. There are many different sub-branches of Security Operations, such as 
Security Operations Center (SOC) and Security Information and Event Management
(SIEM), both of which you learned about in the previous chapter. In this chapter, we'll 
learn about something new: Incident Response

p.62 Security Architecture refers to a high-level combination of different security processes, 
designs, methods, and purposes to produce the overall security structure for a company's 
entire infrastructure. In other words, Security Architecture can be understood as a 
mixture of all the subfields we learned about previously, and more. Security Architecture 
varies from organization to organization, as each should be designed specifically based on 
the organization's business and objectives. To do so, Security Architects must understand 
the company's business drivers, in order to translate them into security objectives. 

p.63 In recent years, the term cloud computing has become more and more popular among 
computer science professionals. Cloud computing can provide cheaper, more flexible, 
and more powerful computing solutions for various use cases. As the popularity of cloud 
computing rises, more cyber crimes and attacks are targeting cloud-based platforms. 
Despite having attacks, cloud computing keeps expanding, and lots of futuristic 
opportunities are emerging with this growth, without any tendency to stop in the near 
future. There are many ways the cloud can be used, such as Platform as a Service (PaaS), 
Infrastructure as a Service (IaaS), Software as a Service (SaaS), and much more. 
Besides, cloud services are very favored by both individuals and organizations. Even 
though cloud computing is expanding quickly, there are learning curves for end users 
to catch up.

different fields: 
Risk Assessment and Offensive Security
Governance and GRC
Threat Intelligence – internal and external
Security Operation and Incident Response
Security architecture and cloud security
Learning – education, training, and awareness

p.78 • Financial services: Highly regulated and highly targeted.
• Healthcare and public health: Regulated, medical device considerations, and 
patient information confidentiality.
• Government facilities and defense industrial base: Government work is unique 
based on the large size of governments, resource availability, and it being the public 
sector over the private sector. This public versus private is noteworthy enough that 
we go into detail about it in its own section, Working in the public sector versus the 
private sector later.
• Information technology, communications, transportation, and emergency 
services: These sectors are grouped to consider traditional information technology 
systems that have high availability needs or have highly sensitive information. The 
hyper-interconnectedness of our society dictates a large number of communications 
and IT that directly relates to the support and upkeep of developing products for 
national security, emergency services (such as 911!), and transportation, including 
flights, shipping, and supply chain logistics.
• Energy, chemical, nuclear reactors, materials, waste, dams, water and wastewater 
systems, and critical manufacturing: These areas may seem diverse but from a 
cybersecurity perspective, they are related to the heavy utilization of Operational 
Technology (OT) that runs Industrial Control Systems (ICSes) to produce energy, 
manufacture plastics and metal, and control temperatures and valve openings of 
important and dangerous mechanical systems.

p.93 As a brief primer on cloud service providers, the three big cloud service providers 
currently are Amazon AWS, Google Cloud Platform (GCP), and Microsoft Azure. 
There are different types of cloud service offerings also. There is Infrastructure as a 
Service (IaaS), there is Platform as a Service (PaaS), and there is Software as a Service
(SaaS). The best way to understand the shared responsibility model for these services is 
graphically. The table in Figure 3.3 shows which partner is responsible for what aspect of 
the infrastructure in these service models. 

p.95 Office 365 (O365) is a solution provided by Microsoft that provides an organization 
with Microsoft Office applications such as Word, PowerPoint, and Excel. Also, email 
infrastructure no longer requires an organization to maintain Exchange Server 
on-premises. 
The O365 platform abstracts a lot of the system administration responsibilities, making 
it possible to administer the platform by non-technical people or small business owners 
that don't have server administration expertise. The functionality is related to account 
management and some other high-level administrative functionality. 
For example, Microsoft has abstracted the layers of having to understand how things 
such as Active Directory (AD) work underneath the hood. When you're securing AD, 
now you need to start prioritizing securing the user and the user access. User access 
controls become critical to cybersecurity, especially since one of the attributes of the 
cloud is it's accessible from anywhere! Your pool of viable threat actors and attack surface 
just got larger.
The same can be said with file shares. If you're hosting file shares in the cloud, who can 
access them, who has accessed them, and the auditability of what has happened to files 
all become important. These audit controls are available, but along with access control, 
ensuring you are prioritizing logging, log aggregation, and SIEM ingestion now moves 
to the front of the line in terms of controls.
Some large recent data breaches were due to improperly configured AWS S3 storage 
containers that were left open to the world. The service has the ability to be secure, but 
when improper configuration management leaves the storage containers open to the 
internet, all your data is on Pastebin.
You have to consider audit records so you can be able to validate and understand what 
happened if someone accesses something or if it's configured to go from private share 
to public share. You also have to understand how to test those types of configurations 
properly to make sure that they're actually secured. 
AWS holds a significant market share in the cloud infrastructure services space with 
Azure second and GCP third. All three of these appear in the upper-right panel of the 
coveted (2020) Gartner Magic Quadrant for cloud service providers, indicating their 
ability to execute and completeness of vision are leading the industry [13].

p.97 There is a traditional structure to information security as an organizational capability. 
Currently, information security typically reports through information technology or the 
Chief Information Officer (CIO) so the Chief Information Security Officer (CISO) will 
report to the CIO. The CISO is seen as a technology function within the organization. 
The CISO reporting to the CIO makes sense because a percentage of information 
security's scope of responsibility is interacting with information technology. It's explaining 
to the administrators and the system owners how to properly configure their systems to be 
secure, why multi-factor authentication is required, who needs to do patching, and so on.
A minority of organizations have a different reporting structure for the information 
security office. Common alternative reporting structures include reporting to legal, 
risk, or even directly to the Chief Executive Officer (CEO). There are pros and cons 
to each reporting structure, but the majority adopts information security reporting 
through the CIO

p.98 An argument for having the CISO not report to the CIO lies in the mission of the CIO. 
CIOs of organizations are charged with ensuring IT services enable the business to achieve 
its mission. If a system needs downtime (being unavailable for maintenance) for security 
patching, this impact may be unacceptable to the business. If the CIO is the CISO's boss, 
the CIO can overrule the CISO on bringing a system down for security patching. You see 
the conflict now with this reporting structure?
Information security is not exclusively an IT function within information security 
offices. An information security office will have a Governance, Risk Management, and 
Compliance (GRC) function. GRC is responsible for ensuring regulatory requirements 
are met. GRC will help maintain and drive any cybersecurity program road map or 
strategic growth initiative. The GRC office is involved in policy exceptions and imposing 
sanctions related to policy violations. They also develop and distribute policies and 
procedures for the organization. 

p.99 Security operations identify a security incident, contain it to prevent further impact, and 
then help the organization return to normal operations. Following activities like this, they 
will typically investigate to identify the original cause of the incident and help prevent it 
from happening again. 
Another area within information security that is common is security engineering. This 
group is responsible for the management of security technology solutions. These solutions 
help secure network devices, servers, workstations, and other endpoint-type systems. 
Specifically, this can mean administering the firewall, mobile device management
(MDM), multi-factor authentication (MFA), and other tools that help secure the 
environment.

p.105 general security certs:
CompTIA Security+
Security+ cost analysis
(ISC)² Certified Information Systems Security 
Professional (CISSP)
eLearnSecurity Junior Penetration Tester (eJPT)
EC-Council Certified Ethical Hacker (C|EH)
GIAC Penetration Tester (GPEN)
CompTIA Pentest+
eLearnSecurity Certified Professional Penetration Tester (eCPPT)
... 

p.144 There are many, many skills that cybersecurity defenders can learn about to be more 
proficient at their job. This section will teach you about defensive skill development 
through analyzing actual malicious network traffic for indicators of compromise and 
interesting attributes.
There are whole books dedicated to just learning about blue team skills. This section of 
this book covers just a few of those many skills, but it is intended to give you a good taste 
of that world and to give you practical hands-on experience. We will gain some experience 
with Wireshark, a network traffic analysis tool, and take a brief look at malware analysis.

p.156 Building and working through labs for hands-on cyber skills is great, but there are 
more generalized ways of getting experience and socializing yourself within the 
cybersecurity community. This section highlights alternative opportunities from the 
traditional 9-5 entry-level position that allow you to apply cyber skills in controlled settings 
and develop practical cybersecurity experience through methods including internships, 
conference events, non-profit support, and looking within your own organization.

-conferences
-internship
-insider opportunities

p.173 If you decide you want to write more, starting as a tech blogger can be intimidating. 
When all else fails, stick to the basics. If you don't feel confident with sharing your 
unique thoughts about a cyber topic, then share the original article. It's about audience 
engagement while showing your personal passion related to your brand. When you do 
share articles, a good rule of thumb is to write at least 1-2 sentences about the article. 
When people share articles with no context, it can appear as spam instead of convincing 
someone to read what you shared. 

• Twitter: Great for puns, humor, and short videos. You can cross-post onto Snapchat 
and soon Instagram. You can link other accounts in your bio section. The age 
demographics are young adults, millennials, and Generation Z. 
• Discord: This platform is great for networking and communication if you are a 
gamer. A lot of young kids are on here. Great platform to build a following and 
connect followers to other accounts. 
• Instagram: The age group is between 18 and 35 with over half being women. The 
platform is used for live streaming and photo content. The age range is still young 
adults and Generation Z. You can cross-post to Facebook and Instagram, live 
stream, and share stories. 
• Facebook: More of an older age demographic; however, surveys show roughly 75% 
of users are between 18 and 44 years of age. Nonetheless, most young kids under the 
age of 35 don't use this app as much. You can live stream and share stories.
• LinkedIn: Over half the user base is between the ages of 25 and 34 years old. Great 
for building business connections and your brand as a business professional. You 
cannot cross-post; you can post videos and photos. You can live stream on this 
platform. 
• TikTok: 62% of users in the US are between the ages of 10 and 24 years old. This 
is a great platform to engage the younger generation. The platform focuses on 
entertaining and short videos. After you have 1,000 followers, you can live stream. 
• Snapchat: This platform is focused on the younger generation and 73% of the users 
are between 18 and 24 years old. This is a great platform that allows you to engage 
the younger generation; typically Generation Z and millennial users are on this app. 
It's also a great way to connect and draw users to other platforms. 
• YouTube: The demographics of this platform may surprise you; of the primary US 
users, about 72% are between the age of 15 and 25. This is still a good all-around 
platform to connect with all demographics. YouTube is very good if you want to 
develop a lot of video content. If you begin to do more public speaking and online 
teaching, I highly encourage you to set up a YouTube page to share your recordings 
through your YouTube channel on your other social media platforms. 

p.191 Here is a list of blogs and news sites with editors and staff writers we recommend: 
• Krebs on Security: In-depth security news and investigations – https://
krebsonsecurity.com/.
• ZDNet: Great all-round cybersecurity news impacting us globally –https://
www.zdnet.com/blog/.
• The Hacker News: Latest hacking news, cyber-attacks, and general cybersecurity 
news – https://thehackernews.com/.
• SANS: Great all-around information about cybersecurity – https://www.sans.
org/blog/.
• FireEye: Excellent intel source on threat actors and IOC data – https://www.
fireeye.com/blog.html.
• Dragos: Very robust blog site with additional outside resources to help with 
research – https://www.dragos.com/resources/.
• Talos: Another very robust site that provides articles and podcasts to fit your 
research needs – https://blog.talosintelligence.com/.
• ThreatWire, also known as Hak5: Great for cybersecurity news in video formatting 
– https://www.hak5.org/category/blog.

conferences: defcon, blackhat, bsides (universités)

p.247 High turnover – employees quitting often!
This is a touchy thing to mention because cybersecurity has a high turnover by design. 
The typical length of a cybersecurity employee's time with a company is around 1.5 to 2 
years. This is not that long compared to most careers. However, that doesn't mean that 
it may also not be something to take note of when thinking about turnover due to toxic 
work environments. 
When looking for jobs and filling out applications, check sites such as LinkedIn for 
employees that have worked within that company. How long did they stay? Was it a 
year? Was it less than a year? It could be argued that if you were to survey 10 previous 
employees of a company you're interested in, and collectively they have an average of 
a year spent with that company, this may be a good indicator of a toxic company. 

p.250 Understanding the SMART goalsetting 
framework
Have you ever felt like you are working hard but spinning your wheels? That you have 
big dreams but cannot seem to reach them, no matter what you do or how hard you 
try? Goals are the steps to dreams, and they are critical for long-term and sustainable 
success. This section will help you take a step back and refine your goals by developing, 
prioritizing, and being specific. In this section, we will review the SMART goalsetting 
framework to provide guidance on how to create personalized goals to fit your career 
desires. 

SMART is a mnemonic acronym that stands for the following: 
• Specific (what, who, where, and why) 
• Measurable (motivational) 
• Attainable (realistic) 
• Relevant (in line with the overall dream) 
• Time-based (end date and time-driven)

p.256 Learning about the mentor and mentee 
relationship
The concept of mentoring has such incredible value, especially within the information 
security community. It's a practical means for sharing knowledge and networking with 
like-minded professionals. These relationships can have various forms and lifespans, but 
there are techniques you can employ to find and maximize their utility.
First, let's explain the difference between a mentor and mentee. Everybody was 
a beginner at some point in any skill. Experienced people have acquired knowledge and 
can share it with those that do not have it yet. They can mentor a mentee to transition 
them from knowing nothing on a topic or skill to becoming proficient.
