A comprehensive guide to administering and protecting the latest Windows 11 and Windows server operating system from ongoing cyber threats using zero-trust security principles

Key Features
Learn to protect your Windows environment using zero-trust and a multi-layered security approach
Implement security controls using Intune, Configuration Manager, Defender for Endpoint, and more
Understand how to onboard modern cyber-threat defense solutions for Windows clients
Book Description
Are you looking for the most current and effective ways to protect Windows-based systems from being compromised by intruders? This updated second edition is a detailed guide that helps you gain the expertise to implement efficient security measures and create robust defense solutions using modern technologies.

The first part of the book covers security fundamentals with details around building and implementing baseline controls. As you advance, you'll learn how to effectively secure and harden your Windows-based systems through hardware, virtualization, networking, and identity and access management (IAM). The second section will cover administering security controls for Windows clients and servers with remote policy management using Intune, Configuration Manager, Group Policy, Defender for Endpoint, and other Microsoft 365 and Azure cloud security technologies. In the last section, you'll discover how to protect, detect, and respond with security monitoring, reporting, operations, testing, and auditing.

By the end of this book, you'll have developed an understanding of the processes and tools involved in enforcing security controls and implementing zero-trust security principles to protect Windows systems.

What you will learn
Build a multi-layered security approach using zero-trust concepts
Explore best practices to implement security baselines successfully
Get to grips with virtualization and networking to harden your devices
Discover the importance of identity and access management
Explore Windows device administration and remote management
Become an expert in hardening your Windows infrastructure
Audit, assess, and test to ensure controls are successfully applied and enforced
Monitor and report activities to stay on top of vulnerabilities
Who this book is for
If you're a cybersecurity or technology professional, solutions architect, systems engineer, systems administrator, or anyone interested in learning how to secure the latest Windows-based systems, this book is for you. A basic understanding of Windows security concepts, Intune, Configuration Manager, Windows PowerShell, and Microsoft Azure will help you get the best out of this book.

Table of Contents
Fundamentals of Windows Security
Building a Baseline
Hardware and Virtualization
Networking Fundamentals for Hardening Windows
Identity and Access Management
Administration and Policy Management
Deploying Windows Securely
Keeping Your Windows Client Secure
Advanced Hardening for Windows Clients
Mitigating Common Attack Vectors
Server Infrastructure Management
Keeping Your Windows Server Secure
Security Monitoring and Reporting
Security Operations
Testing and Auditing
Top 10 Recommendations and the Future

p.35 The threat landscape within the cyber world is extremely diverse and is continually 
becoming more complex. The task of protecting users, data, and systems is becoming 
more difficult and requires the advancement of even more intelligent tools to keep the bad 
actors out. Today, criminals are more sophisticated, and large groups have formed with 
significant financial backing to support the wrongdoings of these groups. The following is 
a list of cyber threats:
• National governments
• Nationstates 
• Terrorists
• Spies
• Organized crime groups
• Hacktivists
• Hackers
• Business competitors
• Insiders/internal employees

p.35 To shed some light on real-world examples of data breach sources today, Verizon has 
created a 2020 Data Breach Investigations Report (https://enterprise.verizon.
com/resources/reports/dbir/). The report is built on a set of real-world data and 
contains some eye-opening data on attack sources:
• External actors: 70%
• Organized criminal groups: 55%
• Internal actors: 30%
• Partners: 1%
• Multiple parties involved: 1%

p.36 Malware is software or code designed with malicious intent that exploits vulnerabilities 
found within the system. The following types of threats are considered malware:
• Adware
• Spyware
• Virus (polymorphic, multipartite, macro, or boot sector)
• Worm
• Trojan
• Rootkit
• Bots/botnets
• Ransomware
• Logic bomb
In addition to malware, the following are types of attack techniques that can be used to 
exploit vulnerabilities:
• Keylogger
• Phishing
• Spear phishing
• Whale phishing
• SQL injection attack
• Cross-Site Scripting (XSS)
• Denial of Service (DoS)
• Session hijacking
• Man-in-the-Middle Attacks (MITM)
• Password attacks (brute-force, dictionary, or birthday attacks)
• Credential reuse
• Identity theft
• Advanced persistent threats
• Distributed Denial of Service (DDoS)
• Intellectual property theft
• Shoulder surfing
• Golden Ticket: Kerberos attacks

p.41 One of the more common projects that OWASP provides is the OWASP Top 10, which
provides the most critical web application security risks. The latest version available was 
published in 2017 and is presented here:
1. Injection
2. Broken authentication
3. Sensitive data exposure
4. XML External Entities (XXE)
5. Broken access control
6. Security misconfiguration
7. Cross-Site Scripting (XSS)
8. Insecure deserialization
9. Using components with known vulnerabilities
10. Insufficient logging and monitoring

p.49 Another important factor to consider with baselining is that your organization may be 
required to follow strict regulatory compliance regulations that will enforce the need to 
ensure specific security requirements are adhered to. Baselines help when you are audited 
or when the need to provide evidence arises. Some regulatory compliance examples 
include the following:
• Payment Card Industry Data Security Standard (PCI DSS)
• Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
• Federal Information Security Management Act (FISMA)
• The Sarbanes-Oxley Act
• General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR)
• California Consumer Privacy Act (CCPA)

p.50 As you begin to define and deploy your baselines, you will find that one baseline will not 
fit all situations. You will need to document and build them for different use cases. The 
following list gives some examples of where unique baselines may need to be defined:
• Network devices, such as switches, routers, firewalls, and so on
• Windows systems, such as servers and clients
• Linux/Unix systems
• Storage/file servers
• Database servers
• Web servers
• Application servers
As we look more specifically at the Windows environment, you may end up with baselines 
for different architectures.
For Windows Server, you have the following:
• The Windows Domain Controller (DC) server
• Windows Server Internet Information Services (IIS)
• The Windows SQL database server
• The Windows DNS server
• Windows Remote Desktop services
For the Windows client, you have the following:
• The standard Windows client (the user workstation)
• Privileged Access Workstation (PAW)
• The Windows Virtual client

p.70 Moving beyond standard hardware-based server models comes virtualization. The ability 
to run many servers on only a few physical servers changed the dynamics of the data 
center significantly. Today, we are in a major shift to cloud computing. Organizations 
are slowly moving away from the traditional on-premise data center and moving all 
their workloads into cloud environments. With the cloud data center, organizations 
can continue to run traditional servers and services, but the overhead of owning and 
managing physical infrastructure is greatly reduced or eliminated.
Another major change with a shift to the cloud is the elimination of onsite facility 
management and physical operations. Building and maintaining a data center is an 
enormous undertaking that is challenging and comes with substantial cost implications 
when designing for highly available services and disaster recovery as part of a business 
continuity plan. Moving to the cloud changes these dynamics significantly. Your cost 
model changes to a subscription model with no ownership of any hardware or physical 
facilities, and a robust business continuity plan becomes more feasible to design. 
This shift also changes the dynamics of security for the data center. Traditionally, physical 
security with access controls, locks, badge readers, and security cameras was all that 
was needed. This goes away with the cloud, but how do you ensure the cloud provider 
is protecting the access and controls? How do you ensure your data is safe? These are all 
valid concerns and change the way we manage security as opposed to the traditional data 
center perspective. We will cover these questions in more detail throughout this book.

p.75 Implementing access management in 
Windows servers
The concept of building a solid access foundation is critical as it relates to server 
management as part of the overall infrastructure. You must consider everything, from 
physical access to the servers to protecting unified management consoles for managing 
multiple virtual servers at once. In the next few sections, we will discuss physical access 
and user access to the infrastructure and the importance of each. Next, we will discuss 
privileged isolation through a tiered model approach and provide an overview of 
privileged access management (PAM) and privileged identity management (PIM) 
solutions. Implementing these tools will help you provide a robust system of server 
access management. It is highly recommended that you become familiar with the topics 
mentioned in this section and understand how critical they are when implemented in 
your organization. First, let's look at physical access and security.

p.76 Privileged Access Management, Just-in-Time Access, 
and Privileged Identity Management
Continuing from the previous tip on identity, let's introduce three critical access 
models that need to be considered for implementation within your server environment. 
Privileged Access Management (PAM), Just-In-Time (JIT) access, and Privileged 
Identity Management (PIM) are all privileged access models that provide an additional 
layer of protection to your admins while they access your infrastructure. These models 
help ensure that privileged user accounts are only available as needed, have an expiration 
date regarding their usage, and are fully audited and monitored when accessing Windows. 
Privileged accounts can be your weakest link if they're not protected properly and 
investing in these models should be a requirement

p.77 Using a tiered model for privileged access 
The concept of the tiered model is to isolate and build layers of containment between the 
Windows systems in your environment. This is accomplished through Active Directory
(AD) Organizational Units (OU) by designing a structure that is divided into three 
or more parent containers. They are labeled tier 0, tier 1, and tier 2. Tier 0 contains the 
systems, accounts, and security groups of the highest security concern such as domain 
controllers, Azure AD connect servers, and identity management systems. The goal of 
this isolation or "tiered" approach is to prevent escalation by provisioning account access 
to only the tier they need access to in order to perform an operation. If an account from 
a lower tier gets compromised, its elevation will be restricted to its assigned tier or lower 
in the model. For example, a user account in tier 1 will only access systems in tier 1 or tier 
2. They wouldn't be allowed access to tier 0. Let's review each of the tiers in a three-tier 
model in more detail.

p.82 Here 
is a high-level list of best practices to keep in mind when thinking about the scope of 
privileged access for your Windows servers and business services:
• Enforcing multi-factor authentication (MFA) should be at the top of the list. 
Require MFA for all cloud-based accounts using Azure MFA or another provider. 
For on-premise servers, you can install Azure MFA Server and have finer control 
over MFA methods.
• Deploy a Privileged Access Management (PAM) solution.
• Use just-in-time access to assign permissions dynamically and avoid permanent 
assignment for your privileged accounts. Helpful services include Azure 
Privileged Identity Management (PIM) coupled with Azure Security Center 
just-in-time access.
• Have an effective account provisioning and deprovision process. Automate disabling 
accounts when employees leave the company.
• Frequently audit privileged accounts in your environment.
• Limit the number of administrators. Always consider job role and function when 
provisioning administrative accounts and ensure the principal of least privilege 
applies. 
• Separate administrative accounts with regular user’s accounts. This will help 
mitigate credential exposure if the administrator’s workstation becomes 
compromised. 
• Limit access to email and internet browsing when applicable from privileged 
systems.
• Enforce strict fine-grained password policies on administrative accounts.
• Limit the amount of emergency “backdoor” accounts and monitor their usage.
• Ensure any changes to the environment go through an approval process by a change 
advisory board. This can include access to highly sensitive systems.

p.83 Understanding Windows Server management 
tools
There are many tools available for Windows Server that are useful for both managing 
and securing the infrastructure. Management technologies were traditionally developed 
for on-premises deployments, but now, with cloud-based SaaS offerings, it seems the 
available solutions are growing exponentially. Microsoft offers solutions for enterprisegrade management through its System Center suite of tools such as Operations Manager
(SCOM) and Configuration Manager (SCCM). There are also third-party paid solutions 
from companies such as ConnectWise, SolarWinds, and CA Technologies, to name a few. 
Each offers a different feature set, depending on your management needs and varying 
price points. In this section, we will review the more common built-in tools available in 
Windows Server, including Server Manager, Event Viewer, and Windows Server update 
services for patch management. Then, we will discuss Windows Admin Center and how it 
can be used to help transition workloads into the Azure cloud. 

p.101 The requirements to deploy Azure Update Management are as follows:
• Azure Subscription
• New or existing resource group
• Log Analytics workspace
• Azure Automation account
• Deployment of the Microsoft Monitoring Agent (MMA)
• Microsoft Update or WSUS configured on your systems

p.104 When building a business continuity (BC) and disaster recovery (DR) strategy, most 
organizations outline recovery time objectives (RTOs) and recovery point objectives
(RPOs) for business-critical services and applications. By using the Azure Site Recovery 
service, these workloads and virtual machines are replicated from primary to secondary 
sites. If a regional outage occurs in Azure, you can initiate a failover to the secondary 
region to meet the RTO/RPO objectives of the business continuity plan. Let's take a look 
at these in more detail: 
• Recovery Time Objective (RTO): The established duration of time for each 
business process in which services must be restored to meet SLAs.
• Recovery Point Objective (RPO): The maximum amount of data that could be 
lost during a major outage. For example, if the RPO is 24 hours and the last backup 
was completed 6 hours ago at the time of an outage, there is 18 hours of time until 
the business will suffer a significant volume of data loss, as defined by the business 
objective’s RPO

p.109 Technical requirements
In this chapter, we will be referencing the following tools and services. If you wish to 
follow along, you can review the licensing requirements and download them from the 
links that follow:
• Windows Assessment and Deployment Kit:
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-hardware/
get-started/adk-install
• Windows Deployment Services (Windows Server roles and features)
• Microsoft Deployment Toolkit:
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/configmgr/mdt/
Additionally, we will be covering the following tools that require additional licensing:
• Microsoft Endpoint Configuration Manager (MECM/SCCM):
https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/cloud-platform/systemcenter-pricing
• Microsoft Intune licensing:
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/intune/fundamentals/
licenses
• Windows Autopilot licensing:
https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/deployment/
windows-autopilot/windows-autopilot-requirements
Tip
Most Intune licenses also cover the use of System Center Configuration 
Manager and don't require a standalone purchase.

p.110 Device management evolution
Using a device management model, many large organizations have adopted Microsoft 
Endpoint Configuration Manager (MECM), formally known as System Center 
Configuration Manager (SCCM), which has been the standard for many years. 
Configuration Manager is a fully mature device management solution also used for image 
building and deployment. To operate effectively, an Configuration Manager hierarchy 
requires resources and the deployment of infrastructure either on-premises or in IaaS. 
As new PC hardware is purchased and new Windows builds are released, a lengthy 
and complex life cycle process to support the new requirements typically follows. This 
traditional model can make organizations less agile regarding staying up to date with the 
latest updates and security trends. Recently, we have seen disruption to this model and 
a shift that is changing the dynamics of device management. Throughout the book, we 
may refer to Configuration Manager as MECM, SCCM, and ConfigMgr. All are common 
acronyms used to reference Configuration Manager.
In recent years, this shift has come with the adoption of MDM tools that evolved with 
the growth of iOS and Android. This growth has shown two parallel environments 
within enterprises. One for phones and tablets, and the other for desktops and laptops. 
This generates a lot of overhead and a unique skill set to support, manage, and operate 
two separate environments. It also adds overhead to your security strategy as both your 
platforms need to meet the security requirements of your policies. Validating security 
within multiple environments can create challenges and adds its own complexity.
A major advantage of using an MDM solution is a shift from primarily an imaging model 
to an out-of-the-box approach. The ability to take your device out of the box, turn it on, 
and receive your policies, configurations, and security settings layered on top of your 
original OS is a game changer. This approach has been well-received and adopted for 
corporate-owned iOS and Android devices. With the release of Windows 10, Microsoft 
has followed suit and enabled the ability to enroll Windows into an MDM tool, allowing 
a shift away from traditional imaging and the overhead it brings. More recently, Windows 
10 with Intune also allows the merging of two separate enterprise tools into one unified 
management approach for your device management program with Intune and SCCM 
co-management.

p.117 Windows Assessment and Deployment Kit (Windows ADK) contains all the tools 
that are used to create custom images. We will discuss this first as it is a prerequisite for 
Microsoft Deployment Toolkit (MDT). Here is a list of what Windows ADK can do and 
why it's used:
• Creates custom boot images or WIM files using the Windows Preinstallation 
Environment (WinPE). WinPE is used for deployment and recovery and can later 
leverage a Preboot Execution Environment (PXE) or boot from USB.
• Creates an unattended (XML) Windows Setup answer file. The answer file is used 
to automate the selection of options during the Windows setup process. Unattend 
XML can apply custom configurations and security features such as setting registry 
keys, disabling Windows features, and running custom scripts.
• Backs up user data using USMT for migration or break-fix scenarios.
• Creates a reference hardened image used for deployment.
• Creates a Provisioning Package (PPKG) using Windows Configuration 
Designer (WCD). This can be applied after an image and can enforce security 
settings; automate Azure AD Join; and add certificates, applications, and network 
configurations such as Wi-Fi.

p.118 WCD is an installation option of Windows ADK. Using a PPKG file is useful for 
automating the application of custom configurations and security settings. PPKG packages 
are useful for smaller organizations that may not have the resources to build and maintain 
images. PPKG are small files that can apply your baselines directly to an out-of-the-box or 
OEM Windows 10. Additional settings available in WCD include the following:
• Bulk MDM enrollment and Azure AD join
• Certificate enrollment
• Network profiles such as Wi-Fi and proxies
• Security restrictions such as password, device lock, encryption settings, update 
settings, and other privacy settings
• Customizations such as start tiles

p.120 MDT helps to reduce the complexity of using the standalone Windows ADK (which is 
a pre-requisite to using MDT). The following are additional security features of MDT to 
consider when creating a hardened image:
• The ability to apply local Group Policy Objects
• The ability to enable BitLocker in the WinPE environment (offline BitLocker)
• Customizable WindowsRE (recovery environment)
• The ability to add local administrators to devices
• The ability to add or remove Windows Server roles and features
• Support for UEFI
• USMT support to automate the backup of user data and settings

p.166 UEFI is also a form of BIOS and is now standard on most manufactured hardware. BIOS 
and UEFI (BIOS) have a similar boot process regarding the initializing flow but with some 
differences. UEFI does not rely on a boot sector to copy a Master Boot Record and uses 
what's known as a boot manager to determine what to boot. The traditional BIOS runs 
16-bit code and leverages only the Master Boot Record, which presents limitations such 
as support for drives larger than 2 TB. UEFI uses the GUID Partition Table (GPT) and 
supports 32-bit or 64-bit code processes in "protected mode" before transferring control 
over to the OS during the runtime (RT) processes. The higher bit support has more 
space that allows for friendlier UIs and faster boot times. UEFI incorporates security 
technologies such as Secure Boot and additionally supports booting over the network or 
from flash memory.

p.169 Windows computers containing a TPM provide enhanced security features that can be 
leveraged for the following types of functions:
• Encryption, decryption, and other cryptographic functions
• Key storage and generation
• Integrity validation (security such as Secure Boot for firmware and boot loaders)
• Strong user and device authentication technologies (Windows Hello for Business 
and Virtual Smart Cards)
• Antimalware boot measurements for start state integrity checks
• Virtualized-based security features such as Windows Device Guard and 
Credential Guard
• BitLocker drive encryption
• Health attestation services for both local and remote attestation

p.216 Configuring Windows Defender Exploit Guard Network Protection 
using Group Policy
In this section, we will configure Network Protection so that we can block connections 
and customize the toast notifications presented to users when they visit a low-reputation 
IP or URL. To complete this exercise, the Exploit Guard ADMX and ADML files must be 
imported into C:\Windows\PolicyDefinitions or to your Group Policy central 
store. Follow these steps to enable Network Protection using Group Policy:
1. Open the Group Policy Management snap-in console from a management 
workstation and create a new GPO linked to an OU that contains the computer 
systems you wish to target.
2. Give it a friendly name such as Windows Defender Exploit Guard – 
Network Protection, right-click it, and choose Edit.
3. Navigate to Computer Configuration > Policies > Administrative Templates > 
Windows Components > Windows Defender Antivirus > Windows Defender 
Exploit Guard > Network Protection.
4. Open the Prevent users and apps from accessing dangerous websites policy 
setting and set it to Enabled.
5. To set the customized toast notifications, go to Computer Configuration > Policies 
> Administrative Templates > Windows Components > Windows Security > 
Enterprise Customization.
6. Choose Configure Customized Notifications and set it to Enabled.
7. Choose Configure customized contact information and set it to Enabled.
8. Open Specify contact company name and set it to Enabled and enter a 
company name.
9. Choose Specify contact phone number or Skype ID and set it to Enabled. Enter 
the phone number of your support line.
10. Choose Specify contact website and set it to Enabled. Enter your IT or 
support website.

p.239 The following are a few recommendations to better 
manage local admin accounts:
• For domain-joined systems, implement a system known as a Local Admin 
Password Solution (LAPS) to rotate local administrative account passwords if they 
must exist. For more information, including a link to download the LAPS solution, 
visit https://www.microsoft.com/en-us/download/details.
aspx?id=46899.
• Use a PAM solution from reviewed vendors, such as Thycotic or BeyondTrust, to 
manage the local administrative accounts on your workstations. These vendors 
offer robust solutions, can manage multiple account types, and have reporting and 
auditing functionalities built into them.
• If you are using Windows Autopilot, set the user account type to standard in the 
Autopilot profile. This will allow the user to enroll a device onto Azure AD and 
Intune but remain a standard user.
• For Azure AD-joined devices, leverage the additional local administrators on the 
Azure AD-joined devices setting in Device Settings, also known as the Device 
Administrators Azure AD role.

p.279 This chapter will cover a range of technologies including several step-by-step instructions. 
To follow along, you will need the following technical requirements as a minimum:
• Configuration Manager
• An Intune subscription
• Permissions to modify Group Policy
• The Microsoft Security Compliance Toolkit
• The Convert-GPOtoCI PowerShell script: https://github.com/
SamMRoberts/Convert-GPOtoCI
• Azure Security Center standard
• Azure Bastion

p.286 Creating a Configuration Item
Follow these steps to create a new Configuration Item. We will be building a 
Configuration Item to apply a Google Chrome policy to disable the password manager:
1. In the Configuration Manager console, go to Assets and Compliance, choose 
Compliance Settings, and select Configuration Items. Click on the Create 
Configuration Item button in the toolbar.
2. Give it a friendly name, for example, Google Chrome – Computer. Enter 
a description and choose Windows Desktops and Servers (custom) under the 
settings for devices managed with the Configuration Manager client.
3. Keep all versions selected in the Supported Platforms section as they are.
4. Choose New in Specify settings for this operating system and set the 
following options:
Name: Chrome – PasswordManagerEnabled
Description: Disable the Google Chrome password manager
Setting type: Registry Value
Data type: Integer
Hive Name: HKEY_LOCAL_MACHINE
Key Name: Software\Policies\Google\Chrome
Value Name: PasswordManagerEnabled
5. Select the Create the registry value as a REG_DWORD data type if remediated 
for noncompliant rules option.
6. Click on the Compliance Rules tab and choose New. Set the following options in 
the Specify rules to define compliance conditions for this setting menu:
Name: PasswordManagerEnabled – 0 – Dword
7. In the Setting must comply with the following rule section, choose Equals from 
the drop-down list and enter the value of 0.
8. Select both options to Remediate noncompliant rules when supported and 
Report noncompliance if this setting instance is not found.
9. Choose Information for Noncompliance severity for reports.
10. Choose OK and then OK again. Click on Next to see your compliance rule.
11. Click on Next to view the summary and create the Configuration Item.

p.296 Device configuration profiles are where the majority of settings are configured for device 
security and personalization settings. Examples of the profile types that can be configured 
include the following: 
• Administrative Templates for ADMX-backed policies such as Group Policy 
preferences that exist today
• Device restriction profiles that contain security features such as password settings, 
privacy, and personalizations
• Delivery optimization to control the bandwidth and caching for Windows Update 
for Business
• Device firmware settings for vendors that support the Device Firmware 
Configuration Interface (DFCI) in UEFI
• Endpoint Protection to configure features of Microsoft Defender such as Firewall, 
SmartScreen, Exploit Guard, and Encryption
• Trusted, SCEP, and PKCS certificate deployments
• VPN configurations
• Custom profiles for deploying OMA-URIs that have yet to be implemented 
in the UI
These are only a few of the available options for Windows 10 and later device platforms, 
and Microsoft is doing a great job of constantly exposing new features to the UI.

p.385 Windows Server 2019 includes the following new security highlights:
• Windows Defender ATP
• Windows Defender ATP Exploit Guard
• Security with Software-Defined Networking (SDN)
• Improvements with Shielded Virtual Machines (VMs)
• HTTP/2 to provide a safer web experience and faster browsing
• Encrypted networks

p.386 The following roles are features in Windows Server 2019 that are available to help with 
securing and hardening your environment:
• Active Directory Certificate Services
• Active Directory Domain Services
• Active Directory Federation Services
• Active Directory Rights Management Services
• Device Health Attestation
Installing Windows Server roles and features 379
• Host Guardian Service
• Network Policy and Access Services
• Remote Access
• Remote Desktop Services
• Windows Server Update Services
• BitLocker Drive Encryption
• BitLocker Network Unlock
• Group Policy Management
• Remote Server Administration Tools (RSAT)
• Windows Defender Features (installed by default)
• Windows PowerShell (installed by default)

p.407 Ensuring your Windows servers are properly hardened is critical to maintaining a good 
security posture and minimizing the attack surface. A best practice for Windows server is 
to only enable the roles and services required to perform necessary functions and to lock 
down the network to only allow the required ports and sources to communicate. Next, 
we will look at implementing a security baseline. We will cover how to implement the 
Microsoft Security and Compliance toolkit recommended baseline for member servers, 
discuss network access controls and the various logon types used to access servers, 
configure inactivity timeouts for interactive sessions, and configure account lockout 
policies. Finally, we will discuss implementing a fine-grained password policy in order to 
enforce strict requirements to highly privileged accounts and securing the logon process 
before learning about how to use Azure Disk Encryption to encrypt data on VMs that live 
in Azure.

p.434 The capabilities of the MDATP solution can be broken down into the following areas:
• The Threat & Vulnerability Management feature discovers device vulnerability 
and misconfigurations using Microsoft Intelligent Security Graph. This provides 
real-time detection and response insights. 
• Attack surface reduction is used to describe the technology for mitigation 
of potential attack surfaces using controls such as hardware-based isolation, 
application controls, exploit protection, network protection, and controlled 
folder access.
• Next-generation protection combines machine learning, analytics, and threatresistance research from the cloud to offer near-real-time protection against new 
and emerging threats.
• EDR refers to the use of sensors to detect near-real-time events and to create alerts. 
EDR responses create incidents that can be tracked and actioned by the SOC.
• The automated investigation and remediation features are what MDATP uses 
to examine common alerts and known techniques to take immediate action 
on an alert. 
• Microsoft Threat Experts is an additional service offering of proactive hunting with 
collaboration from Microsoft security experts directly from the MDATP portal.
• Advanced Hunting uses the Kusto Query Language (KQL) for query-based 
filtering and deep analysis of MDATP telemetry
