Learn how to build a proactive cybersecurity culture together with the rest of your C-suite to effectively manage cyber risks

Key Features
Enable business acceleration by preparing your organization against cyber risks
Discover tips and tricks to manage cyber risks in your organization and build a cyber resilient business
Unpack critical questions for the C-suite to ensure the firm is intentionally building cyber resilience
Book Description
With cyberattacks on the rise, it has become essential for C-suite executives and board members to step up and collectively recognize cyber risk as a top priority business risk. However, non-cyber executives find it challenging to understand their role in increasing the business's cyber resilience due to its complex nature and the lack of a clear return on investment.

This book demystifies the perception that cybersecurity is a technical problem, drawing parallels between the key responsibilities of the C-suite roles to line up with the mission of the Chief Information Security Officer (CISO).

The book equips you with all you need to know about cyber risks to run the business effectively. Each chapter provides a holistic overview of the dynamic priorities of the C-suite (from the CFO to the CIO, COO, CRO, and so on), and unpacks how cybersecurity must be embedded in every business function. The book also contains self-assessment questions, which are a helpful tool in evaluating any major cybersecurity initiatives and/or investment required.

With this book, you'll have a deeper appreciation of the various ways all executives can contribute to the organization's cyber program, in close collaboration with the CISO and the security team, and achieve a cyber-resilient, profitable, and sustainable business.

What you will learn
Understand why cybersecurity should matter to the C-suite
Explore how different roles contribute to an organization's security
Discover how priorities of roles affect an executive's contribution to security
Understand financial losses and business impact caused by cyber risks
Come to grips with the role of the board of directors in cybersecurity programs
Leverage the recipes to build a strong cybersecurity culture
Discover tips on cyber risk quantification and cyber insurance
Define a common language that bridges the gap between business and cybersecurity
Who this book is for
This book is for the C-suite and executives who are not necessarily working in cybersecurity. The guidebook will bridge the gaps between the CISO and the rest of the executives, helping CEOs, CFOs, CIOs, COOs, etc., to understand how they can work together with the CISO and their team to achieve organization-wide cyber resilience for business value preservation and growth.

Table of Contents
The CEO Cyber Manual
A Modern Cyber-Responsible CFO
The Role of the CRO in Cyber Resilience
Your CIO—Your Cyber Enabler
Working with Your CISO
The Role of the CHRO in Reducing Cyber Risk
The COO and Their Critical Role in Cyber Resilience
The CTO and Security by Design
The CMO and CPO—Convergence Between Privacy and Security
The World of the Board
The Recipe for Building a Strong Security Culture—Bringing It All Together

p.9  “Cybersecurity is perhaps the most challenging issue facing the modern 
boardroom – every organization has or will deal with a potentially devastating 
cyber incident, malicious or unintentional, and yet directors still find themselves 
struggling to understand whether their organization is effectively managing 
that risk. It doesn’t help that the constantly evolving threat landscape and the 
highly technical nature of cyber discussions can further alienate the board 
from understanding the right questions to ask. The result is often a sidelining 
of cyber risk to technical experts – the IT department and the CISO – which 
can lead to a potentially critical failure of effective cyber risk management. 
Shamane, Magda, and Hai take a robust, straightforward response to this 
challenge, laying out a clear set of questions for both directors and C-suite 
executives. These go to the heart of effective cybersecurity risk management – are you communicating cybersecurity risk clearly, comprehensively, and 
effectively amongst the C-suite and to the board, and are you regularly 
monitoring your performance as an enterprise? Cyber is not an IT issue, 
it’s a business issue, which requires the whole business to be aligned and 
equipped to respond to, and that starts at the very top. As one director put 
it  recently, “No one thinks a cyber-attack will happen to them until it does, 
and that’s when robust cyber governance shows its merit.” I would highly 
encourage any prospective and current board members or C-suite executives 
to read the chapter for boards in depth, and ask those very questions of their 
organization without delay.”
 Nicholas Chilton, Head of Board Advisory – South 
Pacific, Nasdaq Center for Board Excellence

p.30  As a Chief Executive Officer (CEO), chief administrator, or just Chief 
Executive (CE) in charge of managing an organization, four goals are critical 
for businesses in the new normal: 
• Cloud and digital transformation, which has accelerated due to 
long-term remote working.
 • Increasing the pace of automation, supported by technology adoption.
 • Placing sustainability at the heart of all initiatives.
 • Skills development and talent retention, which gets harder by the 
day due to changing job market demand.
 We live in a globally connected world, where information is the lifeblood of 
an organization, and technology the blood vessels. Traditionally, companies 
build trust through physical files and locks, protecting their customers’ interests 
with manual security processes. As businesses evolve and the nature of how 
they deliver products and services to customers changes, their reliance on 
technology also increases, whether they realize it or not. 

p.36  Understanding cybersecurity 
challenges, organization, and 
reporting 
Cybersecurity is a young and emerging profession. That is one reason why it 
is not fully understood or taken seriously by many C-level executives. While 
many CEOs and board members have extensive cross-functional experience in 
accounting, finance, marketing, or HR, few have much cybersecurity experience. 
As a result, cyber risks are not commonly understood in boardrooms. Many 
companies leave cybersecurity to the organization’s Chief Information Officer 
(CIO)/Chief Technology Officer (CTO), and cyber risk management is 
perceived as a cost confined to the IT department where it must compete 
for resources/budget against new initiatives for revenue generation, profit 
increase, customer acquisition, and so on.

p.46  T
 he CISO is an invaluable resource and leader in helping an organization 
develop the most appropriate cybersecurity strategy, but they cannot do this 
alone. Once the board and CEO are aligned in their risk tolerance and a cyber 
strategy has been created and approved, it must include a plan to create a 
culture of cybersecurity and embed it within the organization. All staff must 
understand the fundamentals of cybersecurity instead of merely complying 
with policies and following technical guidelines. Senior management must 
lead by example. Cybersecurity strategies must align with business goals, be 
assessed against an organization’s risk tolerance, be planned and executed 
accordingly through collaboration between business units, and not be in 
competition with other departments for resources. 
Once an organization has established solid cybersecurity fundamentals across 
the board, once it is part of the culture, the business can operate effectively 
and without major disruptions or regulatory implications if a cybersecurity 
incident occurs. 

p.47 Gillian Findlay, board member and former CEO at Vamp, a global branded 
content platform, and former Chief Operating Officer (COO) at Australian 
Software as a Service (SaaS) unicorn SafetyCulture, shared a typical CEO’s 
concerns: “There are so many cybersecurity issues that should be front of mind 
for any CEO, but ransomware has become the most front of mind. We cannot 
expect end users to protect their company from this threat, so companies must 
secure end-user devices while enabling the employees to work efficiently and 
effectively. Otherwise, ransomware breaches will continue to blight our lives.”

p.52 A Chief Financial Officer (CFO) is the senior executive in charge of a 
company’s financial operations. A traditional CFO will typically act as a 
f
 inancial controller, which is more detail-oriented, and even if they are 
not from a financial background, they manage just the numbers and focus 
on transactions. A more modern CFO will be very forward-thinking. They 
manage risks and the future of the business.
 While the Chief Executive Officer (CEO) sets the direction, culture, and 
budget for the company, the CFO is the agent of change, supporting that 
direction, implementing the company culture, and preparing the budget 
for the CEO. 
Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) is a strategy across an enterprise, 
designed to identify potential events that may affect the company’s finances, 
operations, and objectives and keep risk within the parameters of the company’s 
risk appetite. The CEO’s commitment and that of every management team 
member, including the CFO, are critical to the success of ERM adoption 
and execution.
 T
 he executive team’s contributions, particularly in risk management, are 
required to meet the organization’s strategic goals. Nowadays, this requires 
considering cyber risk and integrating it into ERM.

p.88  Rogier Roelofs, Asia Pacific CIO at ABN AMRO Clearing Bank, added his 
top three recommendations for the enablement of our CIOs:
 • Be aware of the regulations around information and cybersecurity. It 
is an increasingly complex area, especially for companies operating 
across different countries. This creates a lot of complexity because the 
CIO has to think about different requirements in multiple jurisdictions 
and how to comply with all of those items at the same time. Where in 
the past CIOs would mostly think about compliance and regulations as 
a geographical concern related to the jurisdiction in which they were 
located, nowadays you will not get away with that. The CIO needs 
to have a holistic cross-border view of distributed, processed, and  
stored data. 
• Most organizations designate one person to be ultimately 
accountable for cybersecurity. However, it’s the responsibility of all 
senior management to manage cybersecurity risks in their areas 
and protect the interests of all stakeholders. Unfortunately, many 
executives do not see cybersecurity as a senior leadership issue, and 
therefore, creating cyber-savvy boards is of the utmost importance. 
T
 he role of the CIO is to take ownership and develop a robust 
cybersecurity culture. This does not simply mean implementing 
62     Your CIO—Your Cyber Enabler
 various policies and procedures. Instead, senior management must 
make clear through their own actions that cybersecurity is essential 
to the organization’s mission, and the CIO should take the lead in this 
by creating transparency, accountability, and strong communication 
within the organization. 
• CIOs should embed cybersecurity into the company’s software 
development processes. Although the focus is a lot on DevOps, 
this is not good enough, as it should be DevSecOps. This means 
everybody in the IT organization needs to have the mindset that 
they are responsible for fast and secure software delivery.

p.94  Although handling cybercrime is challenging, there are ways that CIOs, with 
the CISO’s support, can outthink, outsmart, and outmaneuver cybercriminals. 
CIOs must play a role in driving technology transformation efforts that 
include planning for better cyber resiliency. 
T
 heresa Payton, CEO at Fortalice, author of MANIPULATED: Inside the 
Cyberwar to Hijack Elections and Distort the Truth, and the first female 
CIO at the White House, shared her views with Shamane on the actions 
critical for CIOs to fortify resiliency in the face cybercriminals. To make an 
evolutionary change, her top three actions are:
 • Understand and educate yourself about what drives human nature 
and incorporate that into your cybersecurity.
 • Get to know the criminals. Create decoys of authentic-looking 
human profiles and systems that look valuable and leave them 
vulnerable to cybercriminals. Then, study the criminal elements 
that attack the decoys and learn from what they do.
 • Beat the criminals at their own game. Leverage the power of AI and 
behavior-based analytics to create behavior-based profiles of criminal 
activities, and then use those profiles to create a digital bodyguard to 
protect employees and systems against digital criminal behavior

p.94  T
 he cybersecurity burden should not rest solely on a security team or a user’s 
shoulders. Instead, the CIO needs to build a digital bodyguard around each 
human and their digital life every single step of the way. To begin, Theresa 
recommends CIOs take two critical actions:
 • Know your user stories. Start collecting your organization’s user 
stories now. Don’t try to fix things at first; just listen. Listen for the 
opportunities to redesign your process and security around the 
employees’ experience using the technologies.
 • Focus on awareness and behavior. Leverage AI to study legitimate 
use cases and behavior at your organization and then train the AI to 
alert your security team when behavior doesn’t match that baseline.

p.95 Give your users a safety net by installing easy and elegant Multi-Factor 
Authentication (MFA) options—there are some great technologies out there, 
and the benefits of using them are significant. According to research studies 
conducted by Microsoft (https://techcommunity.microsoft.
 com/t5/azure-active-directory-identity/your-pa-word
doesn-t-matter/ba-p/731984), MFA stops 99.9% of password-based 
cybercrime in its tracks.

p.95  T
 he CIO focuses on managing the information technology for the business 
while balancing business goals, ensuring competitive edge, and advocating 
for innovation, all in alignment with the CISO to ensure that security and 
privacy are part of the technology roadmap. The CIO’s role in cybersecurity 
extends further, ensuring the effectiveness and continuity of operations. 
Rogier Roelofs of ABN AMRO Clearing Bank puts it very clearly:
 “Although the CISO might be primarily responsible for the 
cybersecurity roadmap, the CIO should have an in-depth 
understanding of how this affects the IT landscape and the 
consequences for the business, something the CISO doesn’t 
have. I do see too many CIOs being very traditional in 
how they see their role and responsibilities. Too old-school. 
T
 hey are too closely focused on the IT landscape itself 
and therefore missing out on what this means for the 
business. CIOs should utilize their technical know-how 
with a robust knowledge of the business side of the 
organization, increasing their visibility and authority 
through strong communication about cybersecurity so the 
environment can act accordingly.”

p.96  T
 he following list details some of the activities of the CIO and their role in 
supporting cyber resilience:
 • Establish goals and plans for the company’s information technology 
strategy, considering cybersecurity and privacy as key decision
making components.
 • Choose and install appropriate technology to simplify all internal 
processes and optimize their strategic advantages while balancing 
security and privacy.
 • Don’t compromise usability for security; discuss with your CISO 
and find the right balance.
 • Enhance the consumer experience by designing and customizing 
technical systems and platforms, focusing on cybersecurity and 
privacy as a differentiator and added value instead of cost.
 • Plan the installation of new systems and give directions to IT 
specialists and other organizational personnel, while ensuring the 
CISO’s security requirements are met. This includes managing the 
expectations of business stakeholders in relation to the organization’s 
exposure to cyberattacks and data breach risks.
 • Approve technical equipment and software acquisitions, and form 
strategic alliances with IT companies while considering their security 
and privacy posture, to support the organization’s cyber resilience. 
70     Your CIO—Your Cyber Enabler
 • Supervise the organization’s technical infrastructure (networks and 
computer systems) to guarantee optimal functioning, and leverage 
this to support your CISO’s priorities in detecting and responding 
to security events.
 • Manage initiatives using information technology while involving 
your CISO in the initial steps. It is always cheaper to build security 
controls into a solution versus applying remediations when a 
vulnerability is compromised, or an attack occurs.
 • Keep an eye out for innovative solutions or improvements in 
technology that might give the business a competitive edge while 
always remembering that cyber maturity varies from company to 
company, from country to country, and from function to function.
 • Analyze the costs, benefits, and risks associated with information 
technology to advise management and make recommendations 
while considering potential financial losses and important security 
investments when making technological choices. 

p.103  Cybersecurity requires collaboration and buy-in across an organization. 
T
 hat must first come from the top. Under the direction of the CISOs, the 
leadership and board of directors must do the following: 
• Understand who owns and is liable for cyber risk. Following a data 
breach or cyberattack, the board of directors, not the CISO, will bear 
most of the consequences, legal fines, and other impacts.
 • Define cyber risk in the context of business risk. The majority of firms 
cannot appropriately define the cyber risk they face, nor the potential 
for substantial business disruption due to a cyberattack. Has your 
organization thought through the impact of a cyberattack, leading 
to a product recall? Probably not. It is vital to put such risks in a 
business context rather than considering them as technical issues.
 • Quantify cyber risk through identifying, protecting, detecting, 
responding to, and recovering from cyberattacks. 
• Consider the cybersecurity implications of third-party vendors and 
suppliers. They are often the weakest link, especially when cloud 
technologies are used and, too often, security is assumed by default. 
Generally, contractual provisions often do not include explicit 
reference to security or privacy obligations.
 • Establish indicators for resilience and monitor your cyber maturity. 

p.119 Enterprises long have used risk management to assess financial risks and 
operational risks, among others. The traditional risk management process 
has evolved along with a business’s scope, size, and value, and each category 
of risk (operational, cyber, financial, and so on) has been followed by its own 
risk approach and methodologies in the risk management process.
 Today, business risk management techniques need to be adapted because 
most businesses are either technology-dependent or rely on IT to run their 
operations. In reality, though, we still face significant divergence in the 
understanding of stakeholders of risk management language, especially 
regarding cyber risks. This distinction is particularly pronounced between 
business managers and IT security, risk analysts, and CISOs. Because of 
this misalignment, companies continue to  face challenges in implementing 
important controls to mitigate their risks.

p.121  Once good scenarios are constructed, the CISO starts the quantification 
process. As part of this process, the CISO needs to identify the different 
areas that could be affected and whether alternative work practices can be 
used during a period of downtime. This activity is done in collaboration 
with the relevant CxO in charge of the affected business activity or initiative. 
T
 he following are examples of the impacted areas:
 • Business: Profit loss, market share losses, and share value fluctuation, 
among others
 • Resources: Employees’ overtime and resources to address specific 
requirements, among others
 • Legal: Lawsuits due to service unavailability or further damages 
• Communication: Communication requirements due to a lack of 
service availability 
• Data: Loss/theft of data or data encryption 
• IT: Including the time of recovery and build

p.144 T
 he COO should proactively engage employees throughout the organization 
in tackling cybersecurity concerns, playing the role of an enabler and 
supporter of the Chief Information Security Officer (CISO). Part of an 
effective cybersecurity strategy is detection, response, and recovery. Regular 
testing enables the COO and CISO to discover and correct problems, alter 
procedures, and retrain people as required to assure preparedness for when a 
cyberattack occurs. This preparedness is critical to avoid significant business 
interruptions, activity paralysis, and even physical damage

p.155  Test, test, test. Did we mention your plan 
must be tested?

p.155 Questions to ask your COO 
T
 he following is a list of questions to ask your COO about how they incorporate 
cybersecurity into their business operations planning: 
• How do you consider cybersecurity in your operations?
 • Do you cover OT (applicable to only specific industries)?
 • Who are your main stakeholders?
 • Do you hold recurring meetings with the CISO?
 • Have you integrated a cyber incident response plan in your BCP and 
Disaster Recovery (DR)?

p.163  T
 he CTO can become a security ally by working with the security team to 
ensure all systems are properly patched and updated, firewalls and other 
security measures are in place and functioning properly, and user accounts are 
properly secured. The CTO can also help to identify potential vulnerabilities 
in a system and work with the security team to develop solutions.
 T
 he CTO’s top priorities should include a culture and work environment 
that cultivates cybersecurity as one of its foundational cornerstones. CTOs 
should set a good example for their employees and educate them on the 
significance of personal and professional cyber hygiene, including security 
in the technology development process.

p.168 Given the increased importance of cybersecurity in business today, here are 
some other considerations you can discuss with your CTO to get a sense of 
how they approach cybersecurity at your organization:
 • What steps have we taken to improve our cybersecurity posture in 
alignment with our CISO’s guidance? 
• How do you evaluate what degree of risk is acceptable in our 
adoption of technology?
 • Is there such a thing as too much security?
 • How do you decide which security investments to make?
 • Are you allocating appropriate spending to cybersecurity tools and 
controls that will safeguard our customers’ peace of mind?
 • How would you respond in the event of a cybersecurity emergency 
experienced by a customer?

p.181 Questions to ask your CMO and CPO
 When a firm starts growing quickly with a data-driven marketing strategy, it 
is critical to ensure privacy and security are integrated at every step, rather 
than considering them at the end of the process. The following questions 
for your CMO and CPO are the ones we recommend focusing on initially:
 • Who owns the data governance process? Does this process involve 
our CPO (or CMO) and our CISO?
 • Is there any redundancy in our privacy and security assessments? 
How can they be further streamlined?
 • How do we ensure efficient compliance with data protection 
requirements, especially with the current massive technological 
adoption?
 • Does our incident response process include the CMO, CPO,  
and CISO? 
• Is there a communication/PR plan to respond to a cyber incident 
and data breach?

p.184  A board of directors’ essential role, whether it serves a publicly listed company, 
a privately owned firm, or a not-for-profit organization, is to offer leadership 
and governance to enable an organization to fulfill its objectives and purpose. 
Board members function as fiduciaries or legal advisors to the organizations, 
instituting solid ethical and legal governance and financial management 
procedures. Additionally, they often are responsible for fundraising and 
advocacy for the organization. 
Commonly, boards are made up of non-executive and executive directors, led 
by the board chairperson. The board is jointly accountable for the company’s 
performance and governance. It assigns day-to-day operating responsibilities 
to the CEO. They are aided in their efforts by an executive committee and 
other committees, including but not limited to the audit committee, risk 
committee, nominations committee, and remuneration committee. The 
board should conduct active oversight and control over the development 
and execution of the firm’s risk management policies and procedures.

p.187  T
 he board’s structure is often determined in an organization’s constitution 
or a shareholders’ agreement, a legal document executed by all the parties 
who have a stake in the company. There are also board charters describing 
the firm’s governance. Good governance rules would recommend that a 
minimum number of independent directors also be appointed to the board 
to provide different perspectives, including directors who have a range of 
experiences in a particular subject.

p.204  Cyber resilience prepares an organization to maintain and even accelerate 
business growth by anticipating, reacting to, and recovering from cyberattacks. 
A cyber-resilient organization can adapt to both known and unknown 
crises, dangers, adversities, and obstacles. The ultimate purpose of cyber 
resiliency is to help an organization thrive in the face of adversity (be it a 
crisis, pandemic, financial volatility, and so on).

p.214  Cloud technology is a way of storing and accessing data and applications 
over the internet instead of on your computer’s hard drive. There are three 
types of cloud computing: infrastructure as a service (IaaS), platform as 
a service (PaaS), and software as a service (SaaS). IaaS is where you rent 
storage, servers, and networking from a cloud provider. PaaS is where you 
use a cloud provider to run your applications, so you don’t have to worry 
about managing the underlying infrastructure. SaaS is where you access to 
the whole application without much customization available. 

p.219  Questions to ask yourself about 
building a culture
 • As a leader, what are some creative ways I can use to set an example 
in building a healthy security culture?
192     
T
 he Recipe for Building a Strong Security Culture—Bringing It All Together
 • Who are the other allies I can collaborate with to build a culture 
together? What role can they play?
 • What ideas do our C-executives have about building a security
aware culture that we can tap into?
 • How can we get support from middle management in driving our 
cybersecurity program?
 • How can we leverage the current organizational culture to build and 
support a healthy cybersecurity culture?
 Try out some of these questions and see whether they lead to a different 
approach and outcome!
